<a id='8f1c5251-1c47-4ae4-99b6-dfbd821038b5'></a>

<::A stylized illustration of an ear of wheat. The background is a rounded square in a medium blue color. Overlaid on this is a lighter blue, stylized stalk of wheat, angled upwards from the bottom left. On the upper right portion of the stalk, there are several orange, tear-drop shaped kernels, representing the grains of wheat. The kernels are arranged in a cluster along the stalk, with some appearing to be falling off or separate from the main cluster.: figure::>

<a id='603588fe-6b18-4b47-9b1e-6f1ec8de6faf'></a>

ASPEN

Clinical Nutrition

WEBINAR SERIES

<a id='7edc0ded-d17a-4a96-8db9-c813699df195'></a>

***Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course***
**Fluids and Electrolytes**

<a id='1db1c6ff-1550-434d-a618-80ab7e0aec42'></a>

Wednesday, July 30, 2025
3:00 pm – 4:30 pm ET

<a id='176a24c0-82e4-4d06-9a76-f79df1b2b1e7'></a>

SESSION HANDOUT
<table id="0-1">
<tr><td id="0-2"></td><td id="0-3">Page</td></tr>
<tr><td id="0-4">Accreditation Information</td><td id="0-5">2</td></tr>
<tr><td id="0-6">How to Claim CE Credit and Access CE Transcript</td><td id="0-7">3-6</td></tr>
<tr><td id="0-8">How to Access Recording and Handout</td><td id="0-9">7</td></tr>
<tr><td id="0-a">Session Slides</td><td id="0-b">8-48</td></tr>
<tr><td id="0-c">Self-Assessment Q&A</td><td id="0-d">49-51</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='0df9d194-fe49-4244-9c6a-f77e69ebb0df'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='d7cfeb07-2970-46ca-965f-876a8885bc91'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='b457afa8-03b4-4b03-b8b9-2bcb3d3873d7'></a>

8401 Colesville Road, Ste 510
Silver Spring, MD 20910
301-587-6315
www.nutritioncare.org

<a id='d5c1fd9d-e8ce-4e98-b81a-86a99422a440'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course:
Fluids and Electrolytes
July 30, 2025, 3:00 pm - 4:30 pm Eastern Time

<a id='a3a2e598-87b3-4739-92a6-4a3681a3998b'></a>

**Course Goal and Target Audience:** The American Society for Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition (ASPEN) programs are designed for dietitians, nurses, pharmacists, physicians, and researchers who practice the sciences of clinical nutrition and metabolic support. This course is ideal for nutrition professionals such as dietitians, nurses, pharmacists, physicians, and others seeking a comprehensive overview of core nutrition support topics. This course and all of its parts is designed at the intermediate learning level.

<a id='0deeab42-bcd3-419c-bf6d-66cd0fe7fb77'></a>

# Course Objectives:
## Fluids and Electrolytes
1. Assess fluid and electrolyte needs of a patient
2. Develop a therapeutic plan for fluid and electrolyte requirements
3. Prevent and manage complications of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities

<a id='42cdd0f7-436b-413d-bad5-e4e25b92245d'></a>

Successful Completion: CE credit must be claimed by August 30, 2025. To obtain credit for the webinars, attendees must participate in the entire live program and complete an evaluation in ASPEN's eLearning Center. Certificates are stored in and can be printed from the eLearning Center. ASPEN submits data as required to the CPE Monitor for pharmacists. ASPEN submits physician earned CME credit to Pars. ASPEN does not submit data to any other credentialing organization.

<a id='97c3fe1c-d290-46c7-b64c-53b3cd4e19b9'></a>

Pharmacists and physicians, please note that ASPEN will upload
earned CE credit into the appropriate system within the required
timeframe. Any credit not claimed by the deadline will not be
entered. Please provide your correct information when completing
your evaluation and claiming your CE credit. ASPEN submits only the
information that is entered by the pharmacist or physician when credit
is claimed and is not responsible for following up to obtain any
corrected information to ensure an error-free submission.

<a id='bed547a6-29ba-4628-81d1-0df3d8e26751'></a>

Policies and Information:
Non-Commercialism. ASPEN subscribes to the Standards for Integrity
and Independence in Accredited Continuing Education. ASPEN does
not provide programs that constitute advertisement or include
promotional materials. ASPEN does not endorse any products.

<a id='09bbec1f-2bb6-4860-814e-146bd45f78ba'></a>

**Privacy and Confidentiality.** ASPEN respects the privacy of its members and customers. Companies that receive personal information from ASPEN to execute the business of ASPEN may use information only for that purpose.

<a id='1abb4521-7919-46b6-9e5b-c627f603987e'></a>

**Grievances.** Grievances must be submitted in writing to Senior Director, Education and Research at ASPEN, 8401 Colesville Road, Ste 510, Silver Spring, MD 20910.

<a id='04260ae1-2264-4215-9e36-ad3a7ad0770d'></a>

Commercial Support and Sponsorship:
Commercial Support: None

<a id='3eb6c0e3-9255-465c-9c56-5c2d8ab307e8'></a>

**Accreditation Statement**

<::The image shows a logo with a stylized 'A' or triangle shape within a circle. Below the logo, the text reads "JOINTLY ACCREDITED PROVIDER" and "INTERPROFESSIONAL CONTINUING EDUCATION".
: figure::>

In support of improving patient care, The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) is jointly accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME), Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE), and the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), to provide continuing education for the healthcare team.

<a id='c0f6d332-935a-4ed8-9548-92030516d366'></a>

ASPEN designates this live activity for a maximum of 1.5 AMA PRA
Category 1 Credits ™. Physicians should only claim credit
commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.

<a id='da0eb970-1c15-457c-876b-fcd928a3af12'></a>

Pharmacists: ASPEN designates this activity for a maximum of 1.5
contact hours/0.15 CEUs. ACPE UAN: JA0002345-0000-25-123-L99-
P. Knowledge activity.

<a id='84a9b95d-68da-4cee-8131-1fab9ceccfe9'></a>

Nurses: ASPEN designates this activity for a maximum of 1.5 nursing contact hours.

<a id='3578fa21-40e6-4e76-adbf-106df2da9ccb'></a>

Dietitians: ASPEN designates this activity for a maximum of 1.5 CPEUs.

<a id='11273821-a4c7-4081-a5b8-ea0ea1ed3784'></a>

Commission on
Dietetic Registration

.eat right. the credentialing agency for the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics

<a id='c0d68362-e79e-4dba-aff9-69e3784ccbaf'></a>

Completion of this RD/DTR profession-specific or IPCE activity awards CPEUs (One IPCE credit = One CPEU).
If the activity is dietetics-related but not targeted to RDs or DTRs, CPEUs may be claimed which are commensurate with participation in contact hours (One 60 minute hour = 1 CPEU).
RD's and DTRs are to select activity type 102 in their Activity Log. Sphere and Competency selection is at the learner's discretion.

<a id='17c996c6-8baf-46a4-8af5-f7d9e4b74d51'></a>

IPCE CREDIT™
This activity was planned by and for the healthcare
team, and learners will receive 1.5
Interprofessional Continuing Education (IPCE)
credit for learning and change.

<a id='c5b3b9e7-a420-49ca-ad15-15f91e7d5891'></a>

Disclosures and Relevant Financial Relationships for Faculty and Planning Committee Members
ASPEN staff have no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

<a id='ded0e660-9dfb-4334-bea9-60436d2deba1'></a>

<table id="1-1">
<tr><td id="1-2">Name</td><td id="1-3">Role</td><td id="1-4">Commercial Entity</td></tr>
<tr><td id="1-5">Anne Tucker</td><td id="1-6">Consultant</td><td id="1-7">Up to Date, Inc</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='78784f99-9cf4-4485-a177-eaca40e748ef'></a>

All relevant financial relationships have been mitigated.

<a id='542e1029-265b-468d-a07a-2d1584a03d43'></a>

Note: an ineligible company is one whose primary business is producing, marketing, selling, re-selling, or distributing healthcare products used by or on patients. For specific examples of ineligible companies visit accme.org/standards.

<a id='dd796a8f-f8c4-4d0e-8eea-ff0e72481eb4'></a>

Financial relationships are relevant if the following three conditions are met for the prospective person who will control content of the education:

*   A financial relationship, in **any amount**, exists between the person in control of content and an ineligible company.
*   The financial relationship existed during the past **24 months**.
*   The content of the education is related to the products of an ineligible company with whom the person has a financial relationship.

<a id='dfc0881f-a9c8-49a1-ba61-7157831c88ac'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='609a9f7f-45a5-4d17-93ce-5ee663caccd8'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course: Summer 2025
CE Credit Deadlines

<a id='ec46c0b2-55e4-40a7-835a-e80a4229b265'></a>

<table id="2-1">
<tr><td id="2-2">Webinar Topic</td><td id="2-3">CE Credit Deadline*</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-4">Fluids and Electrolytes</td><td id="2-5">August 30, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-6">Parenteral Nutrition (PN) and Home PN</td><td id="2-7">September 6, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-8">Nutrient Deficiencies and Malnutrition Assessment</td><td id="2-9">September 13, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-a">Enteral Nutrition (EN) and Home EN</td><td id="2-b">September 19, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-c">Enteral Nutrition and Parenteral Nutrition Access</td><td id="2-d">September 27, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-e">Gastrointestinal (GI) Disorders</td><td id="2-f">October 4, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-g">Acid Base</td><td id="2-h">October 10, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-i">Critical Care and Statistics</td><td id="2-j">October 12, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-k">Ethics for the Nutrition Professional</td><td id="2-l">October 17, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-m">Pediatric and Neonatal Nutrition Support</td><td id="2-n">October 19, 2025</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='1b3840f6-564f-4176-ab2a-f46f2a78f38b'></a>

*Please note that CE credit cannot be claimed after the deadline

<a id='9db4726a-ff7d-488f-a804-6e4e77995d23'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='983a0ce3-d14d-491d-952c-2b2cc7a8032f'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course: Summer 2025
CE Credit – Important Information

<a id='c37cf119-fcc9-4501-9308-61d03e2df392'></a>

**Please note the following:**

*   CE credit CANNOT be claimed for missed webinars. You must attend the live webinar broadcast at the scheduled time to claim CE credit for that webinar.
*   CE Credit is calculated on a per webinar attended basis. If you miss a webinar, you can still receive CE credit for other webinars attended.
*   CE credit will be granted for each webinar attended up to a maximum of 15.5 CE credits for the entire course.
*   You must complete the evaluation after each webinar to receive CE credit for that webinar.
*   You must complete the Overall Conference Evaluation to receive your course certificate. This form will be available at the end of the course.

<a id='1dbfd035-9246-4320-bdcf-eb50ea10959b'></a>

**IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR PHARMACY PARTICIPANTS!**
Pharmacy participants should claim CE credit as soon as possible following each session attended.

Due to Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE) and National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) guidelines, ASPEN is required to submit CE credits claimed by Pharmacy participants within 60 days of the end of a session. Because this course takes place over several weeks with multiple webinars, **Pharmacy participants are strongly encouraged to claim CE credit immediately following each session**, so you do not forget or miss claiming credit within the required 60-day period.

Pharmacy participants are required to submit their birthdate (MM/DD), submit their NABP ID #, and complete the session evaluation to claim CE credit. For more information or to create your NABP ID, please visit [www.nabp.net](www.nabp.net).

ASPEN is not responsible for late or incorrect submissions by the participant.

<a id='eddd233f-9ea3-44c3-8ca2-b546a884db47'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='4745f5a3-993b-4dbd-be99-41b342463394'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course: Summer 2025
How to Claim CE Credit

<a id='5eb50506-c3d0-490a-848a-bd8c48087c7b'></a>

## Log into eLearning Center
Step 1: Log into the ASPEN eLearning Center at https://aspen.digitellinc.com.
(Your login is the same email and password you use for the main ASPEN website.)

<a id='e0e72fc1-b0c6-4553-b172-c7f1bf324645'></a>

## To Claim CE Credit
Step 2: Click on the "**My Account**" button at the top right of the screen.

Step 3: Click "**Live Events**" in the dropdown menu.

Step 4: Find the **Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course Summer 2025**. Under the course title and dates, "**Attend Event**" (note: you will see "**Review Event**" after the course ends).

Step 5: Click on "**Evaluations**" in the menu under the course title and dates.

Step 6: Click on the "**Take Evaluation**" button under the appropriate session heading.

After completing the evaluation, you should see a statement of completion with the date and time. The CE credit will now appear on your CE transcript.

<a id='76f96d57-46d9-4016-a85c-281961c9df48'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='dd9ec262-5d41-4ad3-92a6-0b9106972c38'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course: Summer 2025
How to View CE Credit and Access CE Transcript

<a id='a8629b03-328d-48e9-8687-70e1b3f60c0c'></a>

### To View CE Credit
Step 1: Click on the "**My Account**" button at the top right of the screen.

<a id='4c4fef2a-8b6f-44fc-8359-b4ab58b4e060'></a>

Step 2: Click “**CE Transcript**” in the dropdown menu.

<a id='370f8619-819c-4cf2-b95c-82269671c9ec'></a>

Step 3: Find the Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course Summer 2025 and click on the **Course Title**. You should now see the CE credit listed for each session for which you have completed the session evaluation.

<a id='1edf32ae-5d2d-4cfc-bca2-29c66efbcbd5'></a>

<::A screenshot of the 'aspen | eLearning Center' website interface. The page displays a header with the logo and top navigation links (My Account, Inbox, Notifications, Cart, Support, Search). A left-hand navigation menu includes links such as My Courses, My Packages, My Publications, CE Transcript, Redeem Access Code, Orders, and Profile Information. The main content area shows a 'Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course Summer 2023' section, which presents a tabular display of course credits. The table includes columns for Name, CE Credit, Credits, Type, Completed On, and Certificate. Below the table, there is an 'Overall Evaluation' button with a checked checkbox. : webpage_screenshot::>
aspen | eLearning Center

My Account
Inbox
Notifications
Cart
Support
Search

My Courses

My Packages

My Publications

CE Transcript

Redeem Access Code

Orders

Profile Information

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course Summer 2023

Name
CE Credit
Credits
Type
Completed On
Certificate

Fluids and Electrolytes
1.50
Other
2023-07-27 15:35:53
-
Review Answers

Parenteral Nutrition (PN) and Home PN
1.50
Other
2023-07-27 15:49:54
-
Review Answers

Total
3
Other

option Overall Evaluation: [x]

<a id='ad930c82-b220-4850-af4f-510ec8823a74'></a>

<u>**To Access CE Transcript**</u>\nPlease note that you will not be able to print your CE transcript until the end of the course. After the last course session, follow the steps below to access your transcript.

<a id='72c9a258-8e8e-46c0-810d-cce3d167ad1d'></a>

Complete steps 1-3 above.

<a id='0cfd16a1-6795-4db1-96bf-a639307af686'></a>

Click on the "**Overall Evaluation**" button at the bottom of the course information and complete the overall evaluation. This button will only work after the last course session.

<a id='8d8b466d-bdf4-4d8a-8116-a38bdeff5e50'></a>

A button that says "Print Transcript" should appear at the bottom of the course information. Click on the "**Print Transcript**" button to print a copy of your CE transcript. All course sessions for which you completed the individual webinar evaluation and the corresponding CE credit will appear on your final course transcript. The transcript will be saved in your eLearning Center account.

<a id='8f903757-7915-41de-ae48-f11a21a9c5e7'></a>

My Chapter Events
My Courses
My Packages
My Publications
CE Transcript

**Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course 2019**

<table><thead><tr><th>Name</th><th>Credits</th><th>Type</th><th>Completed On</th><th>Certificate</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Test Taking Tips, Nutrient Deficiencies, Malnutrition Assessment</td><td>2.00</td><td>Dietitian</td><td>2019-08-15 12:09:34</td><td>Review Answers</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2.00</td><td>Dietitian</td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>

Print Transcript

<a id='b312a490-c158-4914-8897-302ab66e0031'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='834fa547-5c3d-470b-b55b-0bc5f1ad7f6f'></a>

Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course: Summer 2025
How to Access Recording and Handout

<a id='7a3ff884-0b18-4d7a-ba05-26c6919eb529'></a>

Step 1: Log into the ASPEN eLearning Center at https://aspen.digitellinc.com.
(Your login is the same email and password you use for the main ASPEN website.)

<a id='a82ec26f-6a55-4486-8b6a-400795e5ab71'></a>

Step 2: Click on the "My Account" button at the top right of the screen.

<a id='f3da7b4b-9a6b-4fd4-b042-af2ef704c9fe'></a>

Step 3: Click “Live Events” in the dropdown menu.

<a id='dc2735b0-e872-4ca3-babe-5cc78cc9c121'></a>

Step 4: Find **Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course Summer 2025**. Under the course title and dates, click on "**Attend Event**" (note: you will see "**Review Event**" after the course ends).

<a id='08c849b1-e9fe-436a-a38a-9c9f83005d4f'></a>

Step 5: Click on "Recordings" in the menu under the course title and dates.

<a id='c89adf2c-09b9-4110-a67a-91b3955fa5c6'></a>

Step 6: Find the appropriate webinar session and click on the "View Archive" button.

<a id='9b5bf2e3-ff8c-4d34-9208-7804cf8f8d7f'></a>

To listen to the recording, **click inside the webinar player**.

<a id='8184568e-6097-4dfc-8775-d6b44fbc96dd'></a>

To download the recording, click "**Download MP3**" underneath the webinar player on the right side of the screen.

<a id='86e4def0-76a4-4095-8d6d-8b7c2ce4123b'></a>

To download the handouts, click on the "**Download Handout**" underneath the webinar player on the right side of the screen.

<a id='e9e3bb56-e1f8-4afb-825a-e68a6bbfab2b'></a>

*The webinar recording will be available in the eLearning Center within 3 business days following the scheduled broadcast date. Please note that you cannot claim CE credit if you did not attend the live webinar broadcast and only listen to the webinar recording.

<a id='160439c4-0447-4a2b-84c1-e1876a094f53'></a>

**If you miss the live webinar broadcast, you can still access the webinar handout and recording in the eLearning Center.

<a id='3a38d943-fb5d-4881-bf9b-6e4f08e09a12'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='84ecb6bf-ae51-4c7e-a6dd-9d5cad8b5be0'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='029aa558-20cf-43be-af96-37d172bd37d1'></a>

ASPEN
Clinical
Nutrition
WEBINAR SERIES

# Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course

## Fluids and Electrolytes

July 30, 2025 3:00 – 4:30 PM ET

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d9a3e0d3-b7ac-4b4c-a666-89edfd5ade95'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='5270ef05-f361-48e6-ba4c-9f1c37757ae0'></a>

## Using the Webinar Player

Click on the tabs on the left side of your screen to access the webinar player functions.

<::transcription of the content
: figure::>
Fluids and Electrolytes - Google Chrome
live2b.digitell.io/session/aspen-5526vnyy/interface/r

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

Info Panel
Fluids and Electrolytes
Jul 26, 2022 3:00pm - 4:30pm EST

ASPEN's Nutrition Support Fundamentals Course (NSFC) provides a comprehensive overview of nutrition support therapy. The course can be used as a tool for helping you identify personal knowledge gaps to further identify future areas of learning. Whether you are preparing for the certification examinations or seeking additional professional growth in nutrition

Info Panel
Chat
Polling
Resources
Questions
Request Support
<::

*   Info Panel: View session and presenter information
*   Chat: Communicate with other session attendees
*   Polling: Answer polling questions
*   Resources: Download handout and reference material
*   Questions: Submit questions for presenters

For technical assistance, click Request Support.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='de5fb7fe-1647-48ba-a45c-0b3b5155eb83'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4fccf766-25f5-4416-8d08-6e898b8f63e7'></a>

2

<a id='38d90309-9c0c-4663-a7e4-41680ce0dbba'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='cfff5628-efe2-44f8-ab17-3bded21cbe17'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0847109d-0453-4319-b324-426cb354e936'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='2e9a30f4-725b-49f7-b08c-065f55de4d04'></a>

<::photo of Anne Tucker::>

Anne Tucker, PharmD, BCNSP,
FASPEN

Clinical Pharmacy Specialist - Critical Care/Nutrition Support
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas

aspen LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d83b7bc4-3694-47a5-bad6-5ece28672eab'></a>

3

<a id='1e88412d-e66f-4124-b6d4-45b6926cc43c'></a>

Disclosures

Consultant for Up To Date, Inc.

I attest that clinical recommendations are evidence-based and free of commercial bias (e.g., peer-reviewed literature, adhering to evidence-based practice guidelines).

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
4

<a id='6f5a3e10-0360-4547-be80-4008b91edc91'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='edba6cd9-fcaa-4d95-a098-8e60d99d92ae'></a>

9

<a id='98098c8a-c8c4-4a07-90e9-403408244f70'></a>

2

<a id='23129cb1-2439-4f35-a26e-ad788e4b78c9'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='a0bd7fcb-c5fc-465b-aa45-a151bb22714b'></a>

Learning Objectives

Upon completion of this session, the learner will be able to:

* Assess fluid and electrolyte needs of a patient
* Develop a therapeutic plan for fluid and electrolyte requirements
* Prevent and manage complications of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4bf072c9-96a5-461d-9357-20d5d93900b4'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='57e27a35-3928-4059-b40c-54f03baa7e4d'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e1e1952a-4e21-4c64-ac58-7e36a99f16a5'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

# Fluids

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='bd11cb16-df91-4511-9903-2d3e8dbaeea9'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='40a8d25b-3d48-4511-8131-ab26c38470c4'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f0c98b21-d03f-4670-a111-3f21ac8c5558'></a>

10

<a id='364eadf2-3cde-4a12-8b90-aa99a417fc79'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='79b1b727-43b3-44b8-a4f4-9d7798b20efd'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='647f50c8-bd9a-4b29-9201-371f56bb57b3'></a>

<table id="10-1">
<tr><td id="10-2">Total Body Water (TBW)</td><td id="10-3">horizontal bar chart</td><td id="10-4">BW</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-5"></td><td id="10-6" rowspan="9">ECF 1/3 TBW Intravascular 1/4 ECF Interstitial 3/4 ECF (diagram with arrows)</td><td id="10-7">ICF 2/3</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-8">• Water content of the body</td><td id="10-9">TBW (double-headed arrow)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-a">• Decreases with increasing age</td><td id="10-b"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-c">• 75-80% lean body mass (LBM) for infants</td><td id="10-d"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-e">60% LBM for children</td><td id="10-f">(yellow rectangle)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-g" rowspan="2">• 60% LBM for males (< 70 y/o) • 50% LBM for females & elderly males (> 70 y/o)</td><td id="10-h">(yellow rectangle)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-i">(yellow rectangle)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-j">45% LBM for elderly females (> 70 y/o)</td><td id="10-k">(yellow rectangle)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-l">Affected by body composition Water content of fat ~10%</td><td id="10-m">(yellow rectangle)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-n">Water content of muscle mass ~75-80%</td><td id="10-o" colspan="2">small building icon</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='38b1e7c4-43c0-4f0c-a50b-584e4b9bd223'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='9ebebb8e-856d-4d8b-a3da-a6219fd812bc'></a>

Water Exchange – 60-80 kg patient
<table id="10-p">
<tr><td id="10-q">(blue rectangle)</td><td id="10-r">Average Daily Volume (mL)</td><td id="10-s">(blue rectangle)</td><td id="10-t">Average Daily Volume (mL)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-u" colspan="2">Water gain</td><td id="10-v" colspan="2">Water loss</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-w" colspan="2">Sensible</td><td id="10-x" colspan="2">Sensible</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-y">Oral fluid</td><td id="10-z">800 - 1500</td><td id="10-A">Urine</td><td id="10-B">800 - 1500</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-C">Solid food</td><td id="10-D">500 - 700</td><td id="10-E">Gastrointestinal</td><td id="10-F">0 - 250</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-G" colspan="2">Insensible</td><td id="10-H" colspan="2">Insensible</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-I">Water oxidation</td><td id="10-J">250</td><td id="10-K">Lungs/skin</td><td id="10-L">600 - 900</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-M">TOTAL</td><td id="10-N">1500 - 2500</td><td id="10-O">TOTAL</td><td id="10-P">1500 - 2500</td></tr>
</table>
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='4a56c9e0-1317-4ae2-b851-c0c88c09539c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='a10813fe-d4ba-46b2-91fd-d4ca2baca64b'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='229b9361-85b4-49e3-b00a-ae88738004d6'></a>

11

<a id='031f0159-29ba-4b3c-910b-9b3a5480ee9e'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='7936cfe7-d345-42c7-b66e-e523e86c8b2b'></a>

Maintenance Fluid Requirements

*   Holliday-Segar formula (generally used for pediatrics)
    *   100 mL/kg for the first 10 kg, then ADD
    *   50 mL/kg for the second 10 kg, then ADD
    *   20 mL/kg for each kg > 20 kg
*   Adjusted Holliday-Segar formula
    *   1500 mL for the first 20 kg of body weight, then ADD
        *   Ages <= 50 years: 20 mL per kg of remaining body weight
        *   Ages > 50 years: 15 mL per kg of remaining body weight

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='bbcaad0d-7fd4-491e-9e79-f8dde9179fd5'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='dece4b3b-f1a1-4d71-93f1-e1660fbeb6fd'></a>

9

<a id='dc288028-b9c2-4f93-b2c5-9199578702f8'></a>

# Maintenance Fluid Requirements, cont.

*   Weight and age-based formula
    *   Ages 18-55 years: 35 mL/kg/day
    *   Ages 56-75 years: 30 mL/kg/day
    *   Ages > 75 years: 25 mL/kg/day
    *   Fluid-restricted adults: ≤ 25 mL/kg/day
*   1 mL/kcal ingested
*   1500-1600 mL/m² per 24 hours

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c15dd588-5287-4a4d-90f0-430ffa5464f6'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c4395442-42e0-4177-9466-8289dad9a323'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='66996014-5608-4fa0-9241-dda939fd7b00'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0fb05236-1ddf-4b01-9386-e2a3c2a06fe3'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='2adaad8a-24a5-457d-9422-7e1734682148'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='992b8806-a4cb-4c80-9125-e5fffcbb1a1c'></a>

Calculating Fluid Requirements

<a id='4b6e7969-0327-4205-9824-b3957f621c79'></a>

* 65 year old male – 70 kg

<a id='edcab71e-33f1-46a8-9c5f-821c1911a2be'></a>

Holliday-Segar formula

100 mL/kg x 10 kg = 1000 mL
50 mL/kg x 10 kg = 500 mL
20 mL/kg x 50 kg = 1000 mL

<a id='1db492c8-a46e-47ff-9b9d-df91f5aec236'></a>

Add together = 2500 mL/day
Divide by 24 hours for infusion rate

<a id='38efeb63-44fa-4c3f-9b80-9767b427b8ec'></a>

## Adjusted Holliday-Segar formula

1500 mL for first 20 kg
Since > 50 year old, ADD
15 mL/kg x 50 kg = 750 mL

<a id='434b6309-687f-4791-a54b-33e0895975f6'></a>

Add together = 2250 mL/day
Divide by 24 hours for infusion rate

<a id='44ad1c55-2e2e-49c1-88b0-86620c6a90ae'></a>

Weight and age based formula

Since 65 years old,
30 mL/kg x 70 kg = 2100 mL/day
Divide by 24 hours for infusion
rate

<a id='67579459-197f-4179-ab3c-7397b32741f0'></a>

spen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='fe8d4486-173c-449f-9091-c592b9658b3e'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='8c877a61-ae10-465f-98c6-bab3a7862808'></a>

Factors that Alter Fluid Needs

**MORE**
*   Fever*
*   Vomiting / NG output
*   Diarrhea
*   Ostomy / fistula output
*   Hyperventilation (10-60%)
*   Excessive sweating (10-25%)
*   Burn injury
*   Prematurity

<::transcription of the content
: figure::>

**LESS**
*   Fluid overload
*   Heart failure
*   Renal failure
*   SIADH
*   Ascites
*   Anasarca

*12.5% for each 1° C above normal

NG, nasogastric; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='16e41d2e-7851-49f6-bdb2-a07d3d8a4368'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='7d080ba3-499c-44a3-aac5-6df94064fbc7'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='3c1e3b67-6531-49fe-af1e-5341d3fddef3'></a>

13

<a id='5c867e95-1d17-43bf-9f33-69d4d8e5e4fc'></a>

6

<a id='84e2b639-f954-4a6a-b033-b79ad47638fd'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='95093d42-ca7b-41f4-b7ab-e55bd2d5ba93'></a>

## Estimating Minimal Adult IV Fluid Needs

1,000 mL urine output
Add 500 mL for insensible loss
Add net Gl loss (mL) or subtract net Gl gain (mL)

Oral Intake 1,000 mL
Stoma out 1,500 mL

Net GI Loss 500 mL

Oral Intake 1,000 mL
Gl loss 0 mL

Net GI Gain 1,000 mL

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c46872fc-64a4-4a34-af14-9f0bceae762e'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='7e53928c-9cb4-45f0-9aeb-b16879dcf1de'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f186da97-2431-4c79-837e-53ce7bde92f3'></a>

Evaluating Fluid and Sodium Status

*   History and Physical Exam
*   Vital Signs
*   Daily Weights
*   Intake and Output Records
*   Serum electrolytes, BUN, Cr and osmolality
*   Urine Na, urine specific gravity, urine osmolality

BUN, blood urea nitrogen; Cr, creatinine; Na, sodium

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='dda2aa8c-04cc-48f2-9466-9c7db650e1d4'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='9541527c-9033-4f05-be2f-27199e900491'></a>

14

<a id='17f0c818-1ffa-4a35-ab07-b9faaa1aeaa9'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='b3f1110b-ed7a-4f7a-9acc-3e9214ded693'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='571fd5ab-82ed-47ce-8446-030721cb5571'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='5ebdd11d-0e9f-4d9f-8875-815720df106c'></a>

# Fluid Volume Assessment

## Fluid Deficit
* Decreased skin turgor
* Dry mucous membrane
* Weight loss
* Sunken eyes / dark circles
* Orthostasis (↓ BP /↑ HR)
* Oliguria
* BUN / Cr ratio > 15
* Elevated hematocrit
* Elevated urine specific gravity
* Urine Na < 20mEq / L

## Fluid Overload
* Edema
* Ascites
* Weight gain
* Rales / crackles on chest auscultation
* Pulmonary edema / effusions
* Elevated jugular venous pressure

BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='5b6f9225-3d95-4304-adf3-35a0be16e377'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='56c4cf69-9fc1-4243-86c8-dad3a123cf83'></a>

Selection of Fluid Choice

*   Evaluate patient condition
*   Crystalloid vs. colloid
*   Crystalloid differences by solution tonicity (and additional electrolytes if present)
    *   Maintenance fluids – hypotonic (typically ½ NS concentration)
    *   Resuscitation fluids – isotonic (NS, Lactated Ringers, Plasmalyte)
    *   Replacement fluids – geared to the type of fluid lost

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d95fb556-cb27-4b9d-9ca2-f9a71c820ddf'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='9035bf4b-1760-4e9b-a656-e22a465b9b1e'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='bc6414a2-cbdd-4a1e-9c84-0efbf62e6d87'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='04543124-e595-44d7-bbc2-ecd30ba88658'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='fc0faca5-e2ce-4acf-bbeb-fcf6ffa3c85d'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='2151ff69-75ed-458d-91b7-a0033efb0822'></a>

Composition of Plasma & Crystalloids

<table id="15-1">
<tr><td id="15-2"></td><td id="15-3"></td><td id="15-4" colspan="5">mEq/L</td><td id="15-5"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-6">Fluid</td><td id="15-7">Tonicity</td><td id="15-8">Na</td><td id="15-9">Cl</td><td id="15-a">K</td><td id="15-b">Ca</td><td id="15-c">Mg</td><td id="15-d">Buffers</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-e">Plasma</td><td id="15-f">Isotonic</td><td id="15-g">140</td><td id="15-h">103</td><td id="15-i">4</td><td id="15-j">5</td><td id="15-k">2</td><td id="15-l">Bicarb (25)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-m">D5W</td><td id="15-n">Hypotonic</td><td id="15-o">- </td><td id="15-p">- </td><td id="15-q">- </td><td id="15-r">–</td><td id="15-s">–</td><td id="15-t">–</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-u">0.225% NaCl</td><td id="15-v">Hypotonic</td><td id="15-w">38</td><td id="15-x">38</td><td id="15-y">- </td><td id="15-z">–</td><td id="15-A">–</td><td id="15-B">–</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-C">0.45% NaCl</td><td id="15-D">Hypotonic</td><td id="15-E">77</td><td id="15-F">77</td><td id="15-G">- (dash)</td><td id="15-H">–</td><td id="15-I">–</td><td id="15-J">–</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-K">0.9% NaCl</td><td id="15-L">Isotonic</td><td id="15-M">154</td><td id="15-N">154</td><td id="15-O">- (dash)</td><td id="15-P">–</td><td id="15-Q">–</td><td id="15-R">–</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-S">Lactated Ringer's</td><td id="15-T">Isotonic</td><td id="15-U">130</td><td id="15-V">109</td><td id="15-W">4</td><td id="15-X">3</td><td id="15-Y">–</td><td id="15-Z">Lactate (28)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-10">Plasma-Lyte</td><td id="15-11">Isotonic</td><td id="15-12">140</td><td id="15-13">98</td><td id="15-14">5</td><td id="15-15">–</td><td id="15-16">3</td><td id="15-17">Acetate (27)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-18">3% NaCl</td><td id="15-19">Hypertonic</td><td id="15-1a">513</td><td id="15-1b">513</td><td id="15-1c">- (dash)</td><td id="15-1d">–</td><td id="15-1e">–</td><td id="15-1f">–</td></tr>
</table>

Adapted from: Mario PL. Colloid and Crystalloid Resuscitation. In: The ICU
Book, 2007 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, 2007:233-53.

<a id='7c14533e-6c6b-42df-92b9-c7da5ddca56c'></a>

17

<a id='bdf567c7-c4ad-478d-85d4-a2f205390379'></a>

Gastrointestinal Losses
<table id="15-1g">
<tr><td id="15-1h" rowspan="2">Body Fluid Type</td><td id="15-1i" colspan="4">mEq/L</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1j">Na</td><td id="15-1k">Cl</td><td id="15-1l">K</td><td id="15-1m">HCO3</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1n">Stomach</td><td id="15-1o">60</td><td id="15-1p">130</td><td id="15-1q">15</td><td id="15-1r">0</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1s">Duodenum</td><td id="15-1t">140</td><td id="15-1u">80</td><td id="15-1v">5</td><td id="15-1w">0</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1x">Pancreas</td><td id="15-1y">140</td><td id="15-1z">75</td><td id="15-1A">5</td><td id="15-1B">115</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1C">Bile</td><td id="15-1D">145</td><td id="15-1E">100</td><td id="15-1F">5</td><td id="15-1G">35</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1H">Ileum</td><td id="15-1I">140</td><td id="15-1J">104</td><td id="15-1K">5</td><td id="15-1L">30</td></tr>
<tr><td id="15-1M">Colon</td><td id="15-1N">60</td><td id="15-1O">40</td><td id="15-1P">30</td><td id="15-1Q">0</td></tr>
</table>
Gastric fluid loss replacement
0.45% NaCl (1/2 Normal Saline) + 10-20 mEq KCl/L
Canada TW et al. ASPEN Adult Nutrition Support Core Curriculum. 3rd ed. 2017:113-37.

<a id='ab831212-6333-4fd8-81b6-9acb0852a574'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='1b9cc53a-732e-40ba-ac3d-1f6580cf5c77'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='2d0b9e73-ecd6-444d-a1ca-917dabb23ad3'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='6d95209a-0685-445d-95e0-f63b7e7511f2'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='9a23f200-3d5a-4d01-8493-2bb2d884d1b7'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='537492d7-72d1-4dc1-b01a-4e5cf8e8ed49'></a>

Gastrointestinal Losses
<table id="16-1">
<tr><td id="16-2" rowspan="2">Body Fluid Type</td><td id="16-3" colspan="4">mEq/L</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-4">Na</td><td id="16-5">Cl</td><td id="16-6">K</td><td id="16-7">HCO3</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-8">Stomach</td><td id="16-9">60</td><td id="16-a">130</td><td id="16-b">15</td><td id="16-c">0</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-d">Duodenum</td><td id="16-e">140</td><td id="16-f">80</td><td id="16-g">5</td><td id="16-h">0</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-i">Pancreas</td><td id="16-j">140</td><td id="16-k">75</td><td id="16-l">5</td><td id="16-m">115</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-n">Bile</td><td id="16-o">145</td><td id="16-p">100</td><td id="16-q">5</td><td id="16-r">35</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-s">Ileum</td><td id="16-t">140</td><td id="16-u">104</td><td id="16-v">5</td><td id="16-w">30</td></tr>
<tr><td id="16-x">Colon</td><td id="16-y">60</td><td id="16-z">40</td><td id="16-A">30</td><td id="16-B">0</td></tr>
</table>
Small bowel fluid loss replacement
Balanced crystalloid (e.g., Ringers Lactate, Plasmalyte)
Bicarbonate or acetate-based customized fluid
0.9% NaCl (Normal Saline)
Canada TW et al. ASPEN Adult Nutrition Support Core Curriculum. 3rd ed. 2017:113-37.

<a id='eee91df7-1b5f-4cbd-b3b1-f1a3aa191510'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='c8532046-ca66-4aea-a019-4cafb6aaf86d'></a>

# Third Space Fluid Losses

*   Abnormal fluid shifts from the intravascular space to the tissues
*   Fluid is poorly exchangeable
*   Tissue water is increased at expense of intravascular volume
*   Frequently seen with the following conditions
    *   Intestinal obstruction or ileus
    *   Peritonitis
    *   Pancreatitis
    *   Pleural effusions or ascites
    *   Trauma

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='32fd2ec4-c032-4601-abba-aa8829e40141'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='7d6474c5-09d3-4ffa-b1b7-a3fb2016020b'></a>

20

<a id='9e1ba370-84ad-440d-9ad2-00c4a1e12837'></a>

17

<a id='e3d3672b-b990-4941-a23b-f7c199a205bc'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='c122ed00-a133-4b65-a925-8e296ec33fb1'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='bad564af-0309-4d7f-a811-1c0b036c5a30'></a>

# Peripheral Edema

## Pitting edema
* Most common type
* Responds to diuretics
* Causes
    * Heart failure
    * Cirrhosis
    * Nephrotic syndrome
    * Pregnancy
    * Nutritional edema
    * Idiopathic edema

## Non-pitting edema
* Disturbance of the lymphatic system (e.g., lymphedema)
* Not likely to respond to diuretics
* Causes
    * Mastectomy
    * Radiation
    * Tumors
    * Trauma

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='27b3637a-5a3f-4932-ab16-5f823e6e7dfc'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='14bfc5a2-72d3-4d07-9067-1a8e6d7a4ed7'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='5ff76107-d128-49b2-b1f5-69b8af84d538'></a>

Self-assessment Question #1

Which of the following sodium concentrations (mEq/L) is the most appropriate choice to use when formulating a parenteral nutrition plan for a patient with high output ileostomy output?

A. 38.5 mEq sodium per Liter
B. 77 mEq sodium per Liter
C. 115 mEq sodium per Liter
D. 154 mEq sodium per Liter

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='0d91a174-c497-4fda-b72d-0b80af386290'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='bc4a2054-4696-4f43-ab67-590e1dbdf1d1'></a>

22

<a id='4a74ffc1-4da0-47fc-a426-fb5472b03b40'></a>

18

<a id='ee947188-8457-4b58-abd1-131a42d88e84'></a>

11

<a id='72307d73-2a3c-4566-8cfe-a8affd1ebb03'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='52a498e9-8bee-4b66-8d03-ae2ae6222cd3'></a>

Electrolytes

<a id='c59a255f-8f42-4483-9bee-c3c00088bb80'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='8a42d872-1165-4dc2-8443-59a55e27a2d7'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ca3c3b6e-efa0-485a-b69a-0204428d516c'></a>

Electrolytes
<table id="18-1">
<tr><td id="18-2">Electrolyte</td><td id="18-3">Adult Serum Concentrations</td><td id="18-4">Adult Requirements</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-5">Sodium</td><td id="18-6">135-145 mEq/L</td><td id="18-7">1-2 mEq/kg/day</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-8">Potassium</td><td id="18-9">3.5-5 mEq/L</td><td id="18-a">1-2 mEq/kg/day</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-b">Chloride</td><td id="18-c">98-108 mEq/L</td><td id="18-d">As needed to maintain acid-base balance</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-e">CO2</td><td id="18-f">23-30 mEq/L</td><td id="18-g">As needed to maintain acid-base balance</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-h">Calcium</td><td id="18-i">9-10.5 mg/dL</td><td id="18-j">10-15 mEq/day</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-k">Phosphorus</td><td id="18-l">2.5-4.5 mg/dL</td><td id="18-m">20-40 mmol/day</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-n">Magnesium</td><td id="18-o">1.7-2.4 mg/dL</td><td id="18-p">8-20 mEq/day</td></tr>
<tr><td id="18-q" colspan="2">*Variations in lab values exist between institutions</td><td id="18-r"></td></tr>
</table>
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
Mirtallo J et al. JPEN J Parent Enteral Nutr. 2004; 28:S39-S70.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a7cc5fb1-4c15-4759-9433-3558d9cda1cb'></a>

<::logo: ASPEN (American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition)
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
The logo features the word 'aspen' in a stylized dark red font, with a stylized wheat stalk rising from the 'p', accompanied by dark grey text.::>

<a id='e58a5772-2556-438f-badd-de484a656331'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='56dca24c-1796-46f9-bdfd-2d8afc6f11b1'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e84568a5-52b0-43bd-81a3-d584271a99ec'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='047c22a9-5280-4fb0-84f7-92903ffe08d4'></a>

19

<a id='1df19a99-e293-4ee1-9009-752208735840'></a>

&#169; 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='55048417-22d3-4d32-82f3-0ffaf079fcd8'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='7eee1fc8-413c-4fa8-ab72-9530d241b230'></a>

# Sodium (Na)

*   Normal serum sodium (Na) 135 – 145 mEq or mmol / Liter
*   Total body Na is 40 mEq/kg (2,800 mEq) in a 70 kg patient
    *   One third fixed in bone
    *   Two thirds exchangeable (mostly extracellular)
*   Adequate intake (Al) is 1500 mg (65 mEq) daily
*   Renal Na reabsorption efficient (< 1 mEq/L)
*   Major extracellular cation functions in regulation of extracellular fluid volume, osmolarity and membrane potential of cells

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='baebca7d-5e68-417b-a74b-6c0a1a0ef1a3'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='96be05b8-afb9-4e5f-b3ec-dc705239ce82'></a>

25

<a id='b2c9ae2f-7ca0-4abe-adfa-60172d2ad026'></a>

## Sodium Disorders

*   Disorders are a result of alterations in water balance
*   Hyponatremia
    *   Serum Na less than 135 mEq or mmol / Liter
    *   Common electrolyte disorder
*   Hypernatremia
    *   Serum Na greater than 145 mEq or mmol / Liter
    *   Much less common
    *   High morbidity and mortality

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='08e249b1-8c52-423c-880b-79cc05b9dc84'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='33e6681e-2d2b-47d0-98ef-86fd1bb23621'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='038cff40-2512-4582-aabd-5f0a87355005'></a>

20

<a id='776cb825-94ec-4449-93e4-a3e4c1428c21'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0dda3c8c-3447-4b48-8c9c-11b7d90ea622'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='2e959ffa-acb2-47db-a03c-db22d3b82b4c'></a>

Clinical Presentation
Hyponatremia
<table id="20-1">
<tr><td id="20-2">Severity</td><td id="20-3">Symptom</td></tr>
<tr><td id="20-4">Moderately severe</td><td id="20-5">Nausea without vomiting Confusion Headache</td></tr>
<tr><td id="20-6">Severe</td><td id="20-7">Vomiting Cardiorespiratory distress Abnormal and deep somnolence Seizures Coma (Glasgow Coma Scale ≤ 8)</td></tr>
</table>
Hypernatremia
<table id="20-8">
<tr><td id="20-9">Severity</td><td id="20-a">Symptom</td></tr>
<tr><td id="20-b">Mild to moderate</td><td id="20-c">Lethargy Weakness Confusion Restlessness Irritability</td></tr>
<tr><td id="20-d">Severe (or rapid increase)</td><td id="20-e">Twitching Seizures Coma Death</td></tr>
</table>
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
Spasovski G, et al. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014;29 Suppl 2:i1-i39.

<a id='af3ac60c-3fc2-41b3-ac9c-b36e5d70cfb0'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='bbb1d41a-baa2-4e0c-b07d-7ca046a7f6d9'></a>

# Hyponatremia

*   Most common type consists of **hypotonic** or low osmolality state
*   Mediated by antidiuretic hormone (ADH)

<::
Hypotonic Hyponatremia

| Appropriate ADH release (low effective circulating volume) | Excessive water intake |
|---|---|
| Inappropriate ADH release (SIADH, hypothyroidism) | Poor solute intake |
: chart::>

SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='636a7c09-420a-415e-803e-c29f76612e85'></a>

pen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4e3c11af-55ed-4407-b990-bab3aca95e57'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='3af65ed5-fde8-41f0-8fb7-981fef675836'></a>

21

<a id='8dd963ba-77b7-4423-9543-2e295216a15f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f8ddadc8-2eff-40f1-a817-194b5d601c03'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='6c19a6c1-551b-40ed-bbff-b48d612f1dc4'></a>

Hyponatremia Algorithm

Plamsa osmolality (mOsm/kg) =
2 x [serum Na] + [glucose] / 18 + [BUN] / 2.8

<::transcription of the content
: flowchart::>
Step 1:
Measure plasma
osmolality

<280 mOsm/kg
  Hypotonic
  hyponatremia

  Step 2:
  Measure urine
  osmolality

  >100 mOsm/kg
    Inappropriate
    renal dilution

    Step 3:
    Determine ECF
    volume status

    Hypovolemia
    Renal sodium loss
    (urine sodium >20 mEq/L)
    Extrarenal sodium loss
    (urine sodium <10 mEq/L)

    Euvolemia
    SIADH
    Hypothyroidism
    Glucocorticoid deficiency
    (urine sodium >20 mEq/L)

    Hypervolemia
    Renal failure
    (urine sodium >20 mEq/L)
    Edematous disorders:
    Heart failure; cirrhosis
    (urine sodium <10 mEq/L)

  <100 mOsm/kg
    Appropriate
    renal dilution

    Excessive water
    intake
    Primary polydipsia
    Beer potomania
    Low solute intake
    (tea and toast diets)

>280 mOsm/kg
  Isotonic or
  hypertonic
  hyponatremia

  Hyperglycemia
  Hypertriglyceridemia
  Mannitol retention
<::

Na correction in hyperglycemia =
serum Na + 0.016 (serum glucose - 100)

Hyponatremia workup

History and physical

Initial
Serum osmolality
Urine osmolality
Urine Na
Urine potassium

Additional
Extracellular fluid (ECF) status
Thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH)
Cortisol
Uric acid

Castillo JJ et al. The Oncologist 2012;17:756-765.
Verbalis JG et al. Am J Med. 2013; 126:S1-S42.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='d3828a14-11ae-404a-8c5b-6ccfd1ec9210'></a>

29

<a id='17a4ae89-63b1-4434-b651-d180fc336470'></a>

Hyponatremia Algorithm

Plamsa osmolality (mOsm/kg) =
2 x [serum Na] + [glucose] / 18 + [BUN] / 2.8

<::transcription of the content
: flowchart::>

Hyponatremia workup

History and physical

Initial
Serum osmolality
Urine osmolality
Urine Na
Urine potassium

Additional
Extracellular fluid (ECF) status
Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
Cortisol
Uric acid

Na correction in hyperglycemia =
serum Na + 0.016 (serum glucose - 100)

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

Castillo JJ et al. The Oncologist 2012;17:756-765.
Verbalis JG et al. Am J Med. 2013; 126:S1-S42.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='820572e1-8342-4a8f-99e2-b464f87c7e40'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a0b7b855-c3a4-4a89-8343-22f2766ce333'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='42f46a62-dcdd-4a88-a4d3-26dfef5a828c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='cd4a0e6b-f5ba-47c7-8d99-61efc7c9df97'></a>

15

<a id='9baa6f6f-b1e2-44ed-b352-b145fbaac9d6'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='0580a355-6d50-4dd6-8208-c949e3a43d8a'></a>

Hyponatremia Algorithm

Plamsa osmolality (mOsm/kg) =
2 x [serum Na] + [glucose] / 18 + [BUN] / 2.8

<::transcription of the content
: flowchart::>

Step 1:
Measure plasma
osmolality

<280 mOsm/kg

Hypotonic
hyponatremia

>280 mOsm/kg

Isotonic or
hypertonic
hyponatremia

Hyperglycemia
Hypertriglyceridemia
Mannitol retention

Step 2:
Measure urine
osmolality

>100 mOsm/kg

Inappropriate
renal dilution

<100 mOsm/kg

Appropriate
renal dilution

Excessive water
intake

Primary polydipsia
Beer potomania
Low solute intake
(tea and toast diets)

Step 3:
Determine ECF
volume status

Hypovolemia

Renal sodium loss
(urine sodium >20 mEq/L)

Extrarenal sodium loss
(urine sodium <10 mEq/L)

Euvolemia

SIADH
Hypothyroidism
Glucocorticoid deficiency
(urine sodium >20 mEq/L)

Hypervolemia

Renal failure
(urine sodium >20 mEq/L)

Edematous disorders:
Heart failure; cirrhosis
(urine sodium <10 mEq/L)

Hyponatremia workup

History and physical

Initial
Serum osmolality
Urine osmolality
Urine Na
Urine potassium

Additional
Extracellular fluid (ECF) status
Thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH)
Cortisol
Uric acid

Na correction in hyperglycemia =
serum Na + 0.016 (serum glucose – 100)

Castillo JJ et al. The Oncologist 2012;17:756-765.
Verbalis JG et al. Am J Med. 2013; 126:S1-S42.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='d1144b9a-0571-46f2-8607-8b8eaaceda9f'></a>

31

<a id='8d1b6199-f060-46df-9cb3-fa536f700975'></a>

Anti-Diuretic Hormone (ADH)

Arginine vasopressin (AVP)

<::Decreased volume Increased osmolality -> ADH release (pituitary) -> Increase water reabsorption -> Decrease serum sodium
: flowchart::>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='01c3bb74-b1e4-43ef-8e90-bac4dac57303'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='cfd06021-34ce-41f6-9689-fe5e3b806086'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e680b7ad-f18b-4e72-9f81-e9784bc82b41'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='50b59d10-6d48-430f-be68-05381d994f0a'></a>

23

<a id='83bc3ef8-5a1f-4025-a6f9-670dd06de00a'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='1bb8a3e4-d7ab-4719-8183-72a971d1f8d7'></a>

## SIADH

Sustained or intermittently elevated ADH level inappropriate for osmotic and volume status that would normally inhibit ADH secretion
Diagnosis of exclusion

<a id='6d28a905-8ef5-4d06-8776-e350bc687940'></a>

## Essential Criteria
*   Effective serum osmolality < 275 mOsm/kg
*   Urine osmolality > 100 mOsm/kg at some level of decreased effective osmolality
*   Clinical euvolemia
*   Urine Na > 30 mmol/L (normal dietary sodium and water intake)
*   No adrenal, thyroid, pituitary or renal insufficiency
*   No recent diuretic use

<a id='c905d3be-2d1b-4113-a13b-d9534636a0bb'></a>

# Supplemental Criteria

*   Serum uric acid < 0.24 mmol/L (<4 mg/dL)
*   Fractional excretion of uric acid >12%
*   Serum urea < 3.6 mmol/L (<21.6 mg/dL)
*   Fractional excretion of urea >55%
*   Fractional excretion of Na >0.5%
*   No change in Na level with 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl) administration
*   Na correction with fluid restriction

<a id='d496eb0f-2132-4152-8f80-ef370709445c'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a0f78b6a-ce79-47ff-b310-3fee5dcd3a65'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='c0665139-7110-4efc-90aa-84e8ea65a121'></a>

# Causes of SIADH

## Respiratory (small cell lung cancer, pneumonia, abscess, tuberculosis)

## Neurologic (tumors, trauma, meningitis, abscess, subarachnoid hemorrhage, pain, anxiety, nausea)

## Medications
* Anticancer agents: cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, vincristine, cisplatin, carboplatin
* Anticonvulsants: carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine
* Antidepressants: SSRIs, TCADs, MAOI, venlafaxine
* Antidiabetic agent: chlorpropamide
* Antipsychotics: phenothiazines, haloperidol
* Miscellaneous: opiates, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine, NSAIDs
* Vasopressin analogs: desmopressin, oxytocin, terlipressin, vasopressin

SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCAD tricyclic antidepressant; MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c0d9bedc-0d2c-4818-a69d-fe4d2646fa6d'></a>

isin
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='cdcfc75a-2c53-4652-b5cd-08217adf8260'></a>

34

<a id='92aaf103-9bc2-40a0-be83-4fd4bf87a1e7'></a>

24

<a id='0822507a-c95b-4031-808c-1d9d7e0f9370'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f919dc6a-31d3-44f7-b750-fdcf8356440a'></a>

&#169; 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='d9288568-acc5-475b-b11f-4ccff7033f3a'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='edbb3bc3-4155-4854-8f8b-476630e29ca2'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

# Hyponatremia Management

*   Identify and treat underlying cause
*   Discontinue hypotonic or electrolyte-free fluids
    *   option Dextrose 5%, 0.45% NaCl, free water flushes, extra free water in parenteral nutrition: [ ]
*   Replace Na deficit and/or increase Na intake
    *   Change in serum Na = (infusate Na - serum Na) / (TBW + 1)
*   Hypertonic saline (3%) for severe symptoms
*   Limit serum Na correction to 8-10 mEq or mmol / Liter per day
    *   option Prevention of osmotic demyelination syndrome: [ ]
    *   option Greatest risk: serum Na \u2264 105 mEq/L, alcohol abuse, malnutrition, liver disease, concurrent hypokalemia, chronic hyponatremia: [ ]

Braun MM et al. Am Fam Physician. 2015; 91(5):299-307.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='e873483f-87bf-4ba9-a20c-621f2a5da154'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='832c73df-3549-463c-8dc0-00b446f08743'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0728d086-e516-4b77-9450-ac753d6c790f'></a>

Hyponatremia Management

<table id="24-1">
<tr><td id="24-2">Hyponatremia Type</td><td id="24-3">Treatment (plus treat or remove underlying cause)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="24-4">Hypertonic</td><td id="24-5">Insulin (hyperglycemia), discontinue mannitol</td></tr>
<tr><td id="24-6">Hypotonic</td><td id="24-7"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="24-8">Hypovolemic</td><td id="24-9">Isotonic fluids (0.9% NaCl, lactated ringers), discontinue diuretics, steroids (adrenal insufficiency)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="24-a">Euvolemic</td><td id="24-b">Fluid restriction + loop diuretics, concentrate PN, ensure at least isotonic fluids (PN concentration = 154 mEq Na/L), NaCl tablets, urea, vaptan (SIADH); glucocorticoids (deficiency); thyroid hormone replacement (hypothyroid)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="24-c">Hypervolemic</td><td id="24-d">Na and fluid restriction, concentrate PN, diuretics, vaptans</td></tr>
</table>

Braun MM et al. Am Fam Physician. 2015; 91(5):299-307.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

<a id='d4935b5c-d6e0-40b4-8d04-5648eb7909af'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c1d842f4-f0a0-4940-a6b9-9f742494638a'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='20b5dfd0-1670-4b26-a2a9-29f15882617b'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ab1cb0f4-456e-4edd-8cf9-0204d1903649'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='fa2771bd-158d-44d9-a28a-1af2f84e6809'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='03dc45dc-1c97-48f7-9e66-98c7ce348521'></a>

## Hypernatremia

* Too much sodium relative to water
* All cases reflect hypertonic state
* Types divided by ECF volume status

<a id='1235377e-ed25-4365-98b7-da3d6ad201c6'></a>

<table id="25-1">
<tr><td id="25-2">Hypernatremia</td><td id="25-3">Na / Water Balance</td><td id="25-4">Common Causes</td></tr>
<tr><td id="25-5">Hypovolemic</td><td id="25-6">↓Na/ water</td><td id="25-7">Osmotic or solute diuresis, post-obstructive diuresis, vomiting, diarrhea or excess laxative use, high insensible losses</td></tr>
<tr><td id="25-8">Euvolemic</td><td id="25-9">nL Na / ↓ water</td><td id="25-a">Central diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic DI (hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, amphotericin B, cidofovir, foscarnet, demeclocycline, lithium)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="25-b">Hypervolemic</td><td id="25-c">↑↑ Na /↑ water</td><td id="25-d">Hypertonic saline or Na bicarbonate infusions, hyperaldosteronism</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='99801753-5bdb-4d9d-a69d-13568249b075'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='6eba39e7-9d47-40ec-9533-a47b84f0195c'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='ddd306e5-c08c-44b1-b8bb-88bda1f5901b'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='10a8d6c9-bc0b-44b7-997f-417c500eda26'></a>

## Hypernatremia Management

*   Identify and treat underlying cause
*   Discontinue hypertonic fluids
*   Correct water deficit
    *   Water deficit (L) = TBW x [(serum Na - 140)/140]
    *   TBW = 0.6 x weight (males) or 0.5 x weight (females)
    *   Administer 50% within first 24 hours, remainder over next 24-48 hours
*   Isotonic fluids (0.9% NaCl, lactated ringers) for hemodynamic instability
    *   Switch to hypotonic fluids / free water when stable
*   Limit serum Na correction to 8-10 mEq or mmol / Liter per day
    *   Prevention of cerebral edema

Braun MM et al. Am Fam Physician. 2015; 91(5):299-307.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='8f2150ee-b8f3-4751-aec7-ee9f0547185b'></a>

<::aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: figure::>

<a id='fe7684eb-b75a-4fe5-8d0f-5c4d43fd4a09'></a>

38

<a id='b07a1d73-98b8-4565-ba03-5642935cf15a'></a>

26

<a id='3efa6031-0a26-4fd5-93a3-f90686653402'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ae6808c0-0af7-4675-aba2-16fd30f0ceb6'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='21ca9598-da10-4f45-b707-b6ecaf955063'></a>

Calculation of Water Deficit
70 kg male with a serum Na of 160mEq/L

*   Water deficit (L) = TBW x [(serum Na – 140) / 140]
    = 70 x 0.6 [(160 – 140) / 140]
    = 42 [20 / 140]
    = 6 Liters
*   TBW = 0.6 x wt (males)
*   Administer 50% within first 24 hours, remainder over next 24-48 hours
*   Can give as free water oral/enterally or hypotonic fluid intravenously
    (5% dextrose, 0.2% NaCl, 0.45% NaCl)

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='74b373d9-656c-4c92-820a-3b64027a71c3'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='5ca984b9-97a9-4178-a0cf-7f7c02284cf7'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f2b59494-861f-4f27-b4a4-95788deba012'></a>

Hypernatremia Management
<table id="26-1">
<tr><td id="26-2">Hypernatremia Type</td><td id="26-3">Treatment (plus treat or remove underlying cause)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="26-4">Hypovolemic</td><td id="26-5">Replace free water deficit (oral water, enteral water flushes, dextrose 5% in water, 0.45% NaCl, addition of sterile water to PN), insulin (hyperglycemia), amino acid dose reduction (solute diuresis)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="26-6">Euvolemic</td><td id="26-7">Desmopressin (central diabetes insipidus) Remove offending agent, potassium replacement, thiazide diuretics, Na restriction (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="26-8">Hypervolemic</td><td id="26-9">Loop diuretic, hypotonic fluids (Na overload), spironolactone/adrenalectomy (hyperaldosteronism)</td></tr>
</table>
Braun MM et al. Am Fam Physician. 2015; 91(5):299-307.
Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

<a id='2038774a-687b-4972-9075-73d158373c09'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='ddbb086e-ab37-43cf-bd12-b6f04ea5e27b'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='137b243e-9198-4bfb-8189-403df3e53cde'></a>

27

<a id='19bd4441-e814-45c5-a830-186520894bfc'></a>

20

<a id='ae6c7c25-e3d2-4ca1-b760-1ba500fff6cb'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='99b03701-10e9-41a5-8ff2-4f390654271c'></a>

Self-assessment Question #2

A patient presents with hypotonic hyponatremia and is currently on sertraline. What subtype of hyponatremia would you suspect?

A. Hypovolemic
B. Euvolemic
C. Hypervolemic
D. None of the above

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='ef6dc8b5-3344-434f-8d23-e81a5322c626'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='34789f37-6cad-41a3-8ccd-0ea74ae10fe4'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='4b5c893e-97d4-49a5-a2de-8449b2a1a499'></a>

# Self-assessment Question #3

Which of the following sodium concentrations (mEq/L) is the most appropriate choice to use when formulating a parenteral nutrition plan for a patient with SIADH?

A. 38.5 mEq sodium per Liter
B. 77 mEq sodium per Liter
C. 115 mEq sodium per Liter
D. 154 mEq sodium per Liter

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4902f7ad-a033-4d86-a5c9-30c58245475c'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='544ac9d6-5b78-4d45-ae4c-9330b76c5c5b'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e9f5b46b-4e15-4d3e-a69d-553e03eced78'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='439cdbfa-c9bf-4947-a3d6-87120ea5a2bc'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='3b3240d4-5f56-430a-aaed-275c9919f5d3'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='165d452d-8b9d-4536-afe0-9dd812ddd783'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

# Potassium (K)

* Normal serum potassium (K) 3.5 – 5 mEq or mEq / Liter
* Most abundant intracellular cation
* Normal intracellular concentration 140 – 150 mEq/L
* Functions in maintaining resting membrane potential, metabolism, protein and glycogen synthesis
* Na-K-ATPase pump regulates entry of K into the cell
  * Intracellular shift: insulin, catecholamines, alkalosis
  * Extracellular shift: glucagon, acidosis, aldosterone (allows renal elimination)
* Kidneys can decrease K excretion to no lower than 10 mEq/L

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='ea275ee8-2f89-43bb-a8af-004ebd2c808b'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='426af964-6953-406a-8455-f0f8c932ca02'></a>

43

<a id='5f93c8f0-c3bc-47c9-bdd8-4ce2ea4556f5'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
Intracellular Buffering of Potassium

Intracellular buffering in acidosis
<::diagram: Intracellular buffering in acidosis

Erythrocyte (red blood cell icon)
Inside Erythrocyte:
Prot⁻
HPO₄²⁻
HProt⁻ (arrow from HPO₄²⁻ and H⁺)
H₂PO₄⁻ (arrow from HPO₄²⁻ and H⁺)
K⁺

Plasma:
Tissue buffering in acidosis can lead to ↑ plasma [K⁺]

Arrows:
H⁺ moves from Plasma to Erythrocyte.
K⁺ moves from Erythrocyte to Plasma.

Between Erythrocyte and Plasma:
H⁺ moves into Erythrocyte.
K⁺ moves out of Erythrocyte.
:diagram::>
Intracellular buffering in alkalosis
<::diagram: Intracellular buffering in alkalosis

Erythrocyte (red blood cell icon)
Inside Erythrocyte:
HProt⁻
H₂PO₄⁻
Prot⁻ (arrow from HProt⁻)
HPO₄²⁻ (arrow from H₂PO₄⁻)
K⁺

Plasma:
Tissue buffering in alkalosis can lead to ↓ plasma [K⁺]

Arrows:
H⁺ moves from Erythrocyte to Plasma.
K⁺ moves from Plasma to Erythrocyte.

Between Erythrocyte and Plasma:
H⁺ moves out of Erythrocyte.
K⁺ moves into Erythrocyte.
:diagram::>

https://doctorlib.info/medical/biochemistry/27.html
<::logo: aspen logo with text "LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition"
:logo::>

<a id='71719e77-8ae3-48fe-865a-3260aacc9296'></a>

pen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='b7d6476c-1210-4fc4-bfe7-b4a4eca96798'></a>

44

<a id='9772a27f-78ce-422a-bab9-75075a6177ea'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='fdb5b8bd-4c62-4549-91c2-2484b0fd2498'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='9be4f710-0968-4274-9ab1-46d354a9489f'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='bccf7fdb-71f9-4865-89ae-24ee31b23968'></a>

Hypokalemia

*   Serum potassium < 3.5 mEq/L
*   Signs / symptoms
    *   Muscle weakness, cramps
    *   Easy fatigability
    *   Ileus
    *   ECG changes

<::ECG diagram showing changes at different potassium levels:

3.5-5.0 mmol/l: ECG tracing with normal T and U waves.
3.0 mmol/l: ECG tracing with slightly flattened T wave and prominent U wave.
2.0 mmol/l: ECG tracing with flattened T wave and more prominent U wave.
1.0 mmol/l: ECG tracing with very flattened T wave and very prominent U wave.

K < 2.7 mEq/L
Low voltage
Flattened or inverted T waves
Prominent U waves
Depressed ST segments
Widened QRS complex (K<2.0)
: chart::>

https://www.techmed.sk/hypokaliemia/
<::Logo: aspen, with the tagline "LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition".
: logo::>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='04d7602e-2716-4a17-98b7-598fa04c3327'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='76142aec-e592-4a75-97da-199d5ae2ac50'></a>

Etiology of Hypokalemia

* Kidney losses- diuretics, hyperaldosteronism, amphotericin, aminoglycosides
* GI tract losses
  * Diarrhea (10 mEq/L)
  * Emesis / NG losses (up to 50 mEq/L)
* Skin losses – burns, strenuous exercise on hot humid day
* Altered distribution – alkalosis, catecholamine surge, excessive insulin
* Dietary – inadequate intake, large volumes of IV saline, pica

Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='287f5044-130e-4b3c-a012-5bee66f5c298'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d6ebc554-da09-41e8-b163-daf33a9e9e1c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0ce91ec0-78f7-438b-96b5-d7ec4c586658'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='25a9bfb1-1cc5-4cea-b264-8f80e2724f29'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='bf5e6800-4f7f-4f48-97a7-2d4bfbe498d6'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='0df07986-d49b-4834-a34e-136ea600350c'></a>

Hypokalemia Management

*   Dietary modification, salt substitutes
*   Replacing hypomagnesemia first may help with hypokalemia correction
*   Oral potassium therapy
    *   Asymptomatic, able to take oral medications
    *   Gastrointestinal adverse effect – large doses should be divided
    *   Liquid preparations may cause diarrhea
*   Parenteral potassium therapy
    *   Symptomatic, malabsorptive conditions, unable to take oral medications
    *   Adverse effects – phlebitis, hyperkalemia, arrhythmias
*   Potassium-sparing diuretics

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='5236db5b-c780-44c0-bfb2-4855985a61c3'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='9bc8f524-d6aa-4476-afb2-ca82481e8f25'></a>

47

<a id='eec0eed6-5de9-4caf-99d3-4cf73d6334f7'></a>

Parenteral Potassium

*   Empiric potassium dose in PN: 1-2 mEq/kg/day
*   10 mEq of K intravenously increases serum K by ~0.1 mEq/L
    *   Assumes normal renal and gastrointestinal function
*   Decrease dose by 50% in renal impairment
*   Dilution
    *   Sodium chloride-containing solutions
    *   Peripheral IV infusion: dilute 10 mEq potassium / 100 mL maximum
    *   Central IV infusion: can give more concentrated; check institutional policy
*   Infusion rates
    *   ≤ 10 mEq/hr: no cardiac monitoring / peripheral IV access
    *   >10 mEq/hr: cardiac monitoring / central IV access

Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='ce32653b-36bb-4602-b2bc-8040313dbb10'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='f924e20e-3307-41a6-b4b9-52b3baae95b1'></a>

48

<a id='4703bd14-5f9e-4a21-9d89-0d1cb5a868e1'></a>

31

<a id='95bf55ae-9bae-4ad3-9237-85294c63f0ce'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='6059074f-098c-4f40-8c5b-5e69ea1dc809'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='9074dba0-9325-44f6-8986-b7c5d5bb8eb3'></a>

Hyperkalemia

*   Serum potassium > 5 mEq/L
*   Signs / symptoms
    *   Muscle weakness, paralysis
    *   ECG changes
    *   Arrythmias

<::table:
| Serum potassium | Typical ECG appearance | Possible ECG abnormalities |
|---|---|---|
| Mild (5.5-6.5 mEq/L) | [ECG waveform showing peaked T waves] | Peaked T waves Prolonged PR segment |
| Moderate (6.5-8.0 mEq/L) | [ECG waveform showing peaked T waves and prolonged QRS complex] | Loss of P wave Prolonged QRS complex ST-segment elevation Ectopic beats and escape rhythms |
| Severe (>8.0 mEq/L) | [ECG waveform showing a wide, sine-wave-like QRS complex] | Progressive widening of QRS complex Sine wave Ventricular fibrillation Asystole Axis deviations Bundle branch blocks Fascicular blocks |
: table::>

www.physio-pedia.com/hyperkalemia

<::logo:
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: logo::>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='38e558b9-0d1b-4015-aee8-4ce8f365f963'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='7b69f4f9-71a9-439d-a291-ccc96eb6805b'></a>

# Etiology of Hyperkalemia

* Traumatic blood draw – hemolyzed specimen
* Excessive intake – usually IV administration
* Altered distribution – acidosis, succinylcholine
* Massive cellular breakdown – intravascular hemolysis, burns, crush injuries, tumor lysis syndrome
* Impaired renal excretion
  * Acute kidney injury (AKI), chronic kidney disease (CKD) 4/5
  * ACEI, ARBs, K-sparing diuretics, aldosterone antagonists, NSAIDs, trimethoprim, tacrolimus

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='3b10835f-101a-4415-bafd-fdca7145517f'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='f00b9605-801b-4781-8304-2f8f53b87913'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='9bd6cc24-3f4d-48a7-8107-8a69124695a2'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='50f552fd-9325-4239-8030-84b18ca37249'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ea7055b6-1eee-4614-9ade-6c2c1296cde7'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='9b426bec-eed3-4056-8faa-ed461bc67f27'></a>

"K Cocktail"
K > 6 mEq/L or ECG changes

*   Stabilize myocardium
    1-2 minutes
*   Shift potassium intracellularly
    30 minutes
*   Remove potassium
    60 + minutes

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='0f110b8b-52c1-4960-a10a-4ef78cc6edd3'></a>

<::aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: figure::>

<a id='1551a1d5-8127-4f36-815d-3fb860096b49'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='3c6344df-8106-4366-9878-16d28d941ef2'></a>

Hyperkalemia Management
<table id="32-1">
<tr><td id="32-2">Agent</td><td id="32-3">Dose / Route</td><td id="32-4">Onset / Duration</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-5" colspan="3">Myocardial stabilization</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-6">Calcium gluconate</td><td id="32-7">1-2 grams IV</td><td id="32-8">1-2 min / 10-30 min</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-9" colspan="3">Cellular incorporation (ECF to ICF shift)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-a">Regular insulin + Dextrose 50%</td><td id="32-b">10 units IV 25 gram IV</td><td id="32-c">15-45 min / 2-6 hours</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-d">Sodium bicarbonate</td><td id="32-e">50-100 mEq IV</td><td id="32-f">30 min / 2-6 hours</td></tr>
<tr><td id="32-g">Albuterol</td><td id="32-h">10-20 mg nebulized</td><td id="32-i">30 min / 1-2 hours</td></tr>
</table>
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='f7452994-d7ae-46c7-b7a7-9845c6316267'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='110b6818-9ad8-4021-87b7-1f69cc82ac22'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='7b28d35e-a34a-419a-9ddf-4fecea837e5e'></a>

33

<a id='3415b138-aa62-4825-875a-1c12a1e582ab'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='2e052bb5-0417-44b3-8c5e-7eb22bd45192'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='6da48b9e-2fd6-40cc-8e9c-b703506e4c9c'></a>

Hyperkalemia Management
<table id="33-1">
<tr><td id="33-2">Agent</td><td id="33-3" colspan="2">Dose / Route</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-4" colspan="3">Increase potassium elimination</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-5">Furosemide</td><td id="33-6">20-40 mg IV</td><td id="33-7">5-15 min / 4-6 hours</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-8">Sodium polystyrene sulfonate</td><td id="33-9">15-60 grams PO or PR</td><td id="33-a">60 min / 4-6 hours</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-b">Patiromer (not for acute use)</td><td id="33-c">8.4 grams PO daily</td><td id="33-d">7 hours / 24 hours</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-e">Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate</td><td id="33-f">10 grams PO 3 times daily x 48 hours, then 10 grams PO daily</td><td id="33-g">1 hour / 3.5 days</td></tr>
<tr><td id="33-h">Hemodialysis</td><td id="33-i">2-4 hours</td><td id="33-j">Immediate / Variable</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='28977406-73f4-4c32-9a26-7fcb0fda1547'></a>

aspen

LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='b29c6b86-707f-474e-8018-7fda976e2837'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='001a249c-eb85-407f-b4f6-4c21bd1c1079'></a>

## Self-assessment Question #4

Which of the follow is/are important considerations when ordering parenteral potassium supplementation?

A. Location of patient
B. Type of intravenous access
C. Renal function
D. All of the above

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral Enteral Nutrition

<a id='116008d0-cac4-40fe-9223-20574d15a96d'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='89499246-1843-4167-b516-8638257e3727'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='a679555e-15e7-41d8-b097-cdc73cc1a12c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f5eae341-6154-447c-86f4-7f89221879c5'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='c8f75ef3-c857-4f1a-927e-2718267e2d16'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='c2215b57-6433-4435-9857-9f5434deeced'></a>

Self-assessment Question #5

A patient presents with peaked T-waves on ECG and a serum potassium of 6.5 mEq/L. Which of the following is used in the treatment of hyperkalemia with the mechanism of increased potassium elimination?

option A. Furosemide: [ ]
option B. Calcium gluconate: [ ]
option C. Albuterol: [ ]
option D. Insulin: [ ]

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d1d461fc-f00e-490d-9c3c-61b73968ca75'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='db872041-52f3-4b68-8665-46ec6a4c4093'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='38be4cd8-7197-4df2-bd1d-de1734674b45'></a>

## Magnesium

*   Second most abundant intracellular cation
*   50% in bone and 50% in soft tissue
*   Normal serum magnesium 1.7 - 2.4 mg/dL
*   Absorbed in the jejunum and regulated by the kidney
*   Important as enzyme cofactor, nature's calcium blocker, neuromuscular transmission and cardiovascular tone, metabolism
*   Maintaining high-normal range serum Mg ~ 2.7 mg/dL
    *   Reduces ventricular ectopy
    *   Improves K+ retention
*   Hypermagnesemia not common, typically associated with renal dysfunction
    *   Treatment reduced intake, increased excretion, supportive care measures

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

Hammill-Ruth RJ et al. Crit Care Med. 1996; 24:38-45

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='590d845d-6cad-425a-8e80-3636660ff7f7'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='27047bf6-8722-439a-b122-a22674c83f5d'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='cfc3ce6d-53ee-4a1e-ba1f-754d62995e93'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='2f8c8786-e394-4692-b208-a75d6c8d99c5'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e54928b2-aedc-454a-9338-70c443840812'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f70b5a96-f759-4b52-a96b-fd4354032cce'></a>

## Etiology of Hypomagnesemia

*   Poor intake
*   Malabsorption / gastrointestinal loss
    *   Small bowel diseases, gastric bypass, alcoholism, laxatives, diarrhea
*   Intracellular shift (insulin)

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a72e8144-ac85-4c4d-abeb-db368a64576b'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='3191eae6-e110-4b74-8c6d-c949e0da937a'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0f6936f0-7672-4c54-9cb8-3d742d702d09'></a>

# Hypomagnesemia and Proton Pump Inhibitors

*   Long term PPI use may be associated with hypomagnesemia
*   Hypomagnesemia may persist despite Mg supplements
*   Mg levels returned to normal after stopping PPI's
*   Histamine-2 receptor blockers (e.g., famotidine) without effect

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

Hess MW, et al. Ailment Pharmacol Ther 2012;36:405-413.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c020c70e-afc0-46c4-9c63-52cc9be2020b'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='8eeb8399-6a98-467c-b5f1-7766b6296036'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='9ea78b8c-084f-40b4-9d1d-37bd22be027f'></a>

36

<a id='2edc81ed-6848-435a-95db-0bee8844e8b6'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='88f0ae3d-b652-4f95-a6dc-dedb00fb009e'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='6116f844-3872-489e-a058-b632496814be'></a>

## Hypomagnesemia Management

*   Dietary modification
*   Oral magnesium therapy
    *   Asymptomatic, able to take oral medications
    *   Magnesium oxide and magnesium hydroxide
    *   Adverse effect - abdominal cramping, diarrhea
    *   May be difficult to replace magnesium deficits orally if large doses for multiple days are required due risk of diarrhea
*   Parenteral magnesium therapy
    *   Symptomatic, malabsorptive conditions, unable to take oral medications
    *   Adverse effects - phlebitis, injection site pain

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='43e53dc2-54cc-4da6-ba96-f7280e7a2f62'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='d4c60ffd-a453-4885-8a83-ba1076b378d3'></a>

59

<a id='de42be58-7b0c-43d9-9de8-c52f7a147be4'></a>

# Parenteral Magnesium
* Decrease dose by 50% in renal impairment
* Empiric magnesium dose in PN: 0.3-0.5 mEq/kg/day
* 8 mEq of Mg intravenously increases serum Mg by ~0.1 mg/dL
  * Assumes normal renal and gastrointestinal function
* Dosing
  * Serum Mg 1-1.5 mg/dL: 8-32 mEq, up to 1 mEq/kg
  * Serum Mg < 1 mg/dL: 32-64 mEq, up to 1.5 mEq/kg
* Infusion rates
  * ≤ 8 mEq Mg per hour
  * Prevents renal wasting and infusion reactions

Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral Enteral Nutrition

<a id='bbca3370-bef5-40f1-a74c-149777d5640f'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='98befaa9-3bd5-4a13-a849-9a91beae210a'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='03fc6eda-c296-4d1b-9c50-488066565400'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f3446044-ec9d-498a-b588-0aedf49a37ad'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='b04e5db8-dc2e-4193-8f3e-f436a7726a6f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='a58b8269-db0c-48ca-a1b1-7e5a76ba4914'></a>

Self-assessment Question #6

A patient is noted to have a serum magnesium of 1.5 mg/dL. Serum
creatinine is 2.2 mg/dL. What is an appropriate recommendation for
magnesium sulfate IV?

a. Magnesium supplementation is not indicated
b. 16 mEq magnesium sulfate
c. 24 mEq magnesium sulfate
d. 48 mEq magnesium sulfate

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='bed24f24-418b-4645-9464-0ee7de94765a'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c8cc7511-e9a3-4d9c-b662-b68aad2ccb94'></a>

61

<a id='911640b0-8136-43cc-85c7-8f63eef76a32'></a>

# Calcium

* Majority of calcium stored in bones and teeth
* 1% is extracellular and 60% of that is bound to albumin
* Normal serum calcium 9-10.5 mg/dL
* Normal serum ionized serum calcium
  * 4.4 - 5.4 mg/dL
  * 1.1 - 1.35 mmol/L
* Albumin-corrected Ca2+ equation (not reliable in critically ill)
  * Corrected Ca2+ = 0.8 (4 - measured albumin) + measured Ca2+
* Essential for normal muscle contraction, nerve function, blood coagulation and bone formation

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='fa99de67-9783-4804-9396-47242186b392'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c5c7635f-8c2a-457c-bb0e-d65a66b7ac56'></a>

62

<a id='87dec423-59b2-403d-88e4-684ea0336237'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='8e117824-87bb-4c82-b774-c6def00562d5'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='8dd09e11-c83e-4c38-9c04-aba645367997'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='34fae564-b031-4834-a7ff-3e392028bc66'></a>

Actions of Hormones Involved in Calcium Phosphate Homeostasis
<::chart: The diagram illustrates the actions of hormones involved in calcium phosphate homeostasis, showing interactions between the GI Tract, Blood, Bones, and Kidneys. Calcium and Phosphate are absorbed from the GI Tract into the Blood, influenced by Calcitriol (indicated by a double plus sign, meaning increase). From the Blood, Calcium and Phosphate are transported to Bones. PTH (parathyroid hormone) inhibits this transport (indicated by a minus sign). From Bones, Calcium and Phosphate are released into the Blood, influenced by PTH and Calcitriol (indicated by a double plus sign). In the Blood, PTH, Calcitriol, and FGF23 regulate Calcium and Phosphate levels. PTH increases Calcium and decreases Phosphate. Calcitriol increases both Calcium and Phosphate. FGF23 decreases Phosphate. Calcitonin is shown to decrease Calcium and Phosphate in the blood. The Kidneys filter Calcium and Phosphate (Glomerular Filtration). PTH and Calcitriol increase Calcium reabsorption in the kidneys, while Calcitriol and FGF23 decrease Phosphate reabsorption. The diagram also includes a legend for the shapes used:
- Electrolytes: represented by a pink rectangle
- Hormones: represented by a yellow rectangle
- Physiologic Effects: represented by a green rectangle

Net Effect
PTH: ↑calcium, ↓phosphorus
Calcitriol: ↑calcium, ↑ phosphorus
Calcitonin: ↓calcium, ↓phosphorus
FGF23: ↓phosphorus::>
PTH, parathyroid hormone; FGF23, fibroblast growth factor 23

<a id='26ffac22-2b97-40ad-baaf-6bebad6f8739'></a>

<::transcription of the content
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: figure::>

<a id='5f8e0f0c-244d-4291-9806-ae135abfd639'></a>

63

<a id='2ff95520-b6d4-490e-9f0d-aa0dcf57c3e6'></a>

Hypocalcemia Management

*   Correct hypomagnesemia if present (reduced parathyroid hormone)
*   Oral calcium therapy
    *   Asymptomatic, able to take oral medications
    *   Elemental calcium content or oral products varies by salt (9-40%)
    *   Adverse effect – constipation
*   Oral vitamin D therapy
*   Parenteral calcium therapy
    *   Symptomatic, malabsorptive conditions, unable to take oral medications

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a2ddd4f6-6e4d-41cd-b0fd-6fb6a06ea738'></a>

<::aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: figure::>

<a id='2c5fd17d-de9c-4d1d-909a-8d09b3c2c77d'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='78395c96-ea69-49e1-a653-cf6eeac49d11'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='a5c1474f-5fd5-4a8a-aae7-16d17dc5d47c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ce7f164d-6825-4e5c-b63d-9c1e2edaff24'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='411d858d-7d3b-494a-aeff-ceb94cb8ad7e'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='b4ca64e0-57bb-4911-afa3-00faa13ba7b3'></a>

Oral Calcium Supplements
<table id="39-1">
<tr><td id="39-2">Calcium Salt</td><td id="39-3">Elemental Ca (mEq/g)</td><td id="39-4">Elemental Ca %</td><td id="39-5">Formulation</td><td id="39-6">Admin Route</td></tr>
<tr><td id="39-7">Calcium chloride</td><td id="39-8">13.6</td><td id="39-9">27</td><td id="39-a">1 g / 10 ml</td><td id="39-b">IV</td></tr>
<tr><td id="39-c">Calcium gluconate</td><td id="39-d">4.56</td><td id="39-e">9</td><td id="39-f">1 g / 10 ml 500 mg tab</td><td id="39-g">IV or PO</td></tr>
<tr><td id="39-h">Calcium acetate</td><td id="39-i">12.7</td><td id="39-j">25</td><td id="39-k">667 mg tab</td><td id="39-l">PO</td></tr>
<tr><td id="39-m">Calcium carbonate</td><td id="39-n">20</td><td id="39-o">40</td><td id="39-p">500 mg tab</td><td id="39-q">PO</td></tr>
<tr><td id="39-r">Calcium citrate</td><td id="39-s">10.5</td><td id="39-t">21</td><td id="39-u">950 mg tab</td><td id="39-v">PO</td></tr>
</table>
© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='39a6903d-e2fc-4521-93f1-3e4c85eb0750'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='6b7bc3f2-63fc-431b-9edf-55da41dd2da2'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='76cc273f-87bb-4033-9e31-7b4953b8a60d'></a>

Parenteral Calcium

* Empiric calcium dose in PN: 10-15 mEq/day
  * Always check calcium-phosphate compatibility
  * Calcium may be removed from PN for short periods in adults
* Gluconate salt preferred in PN and peripheral IV
  * 1 g calcium gluconate = 4.65 mEq elemental calcium
  * 1 g calcium chloride = 13.6 mEq elemental calcium
* Bolus dosing versus continuous infusions
* Adverse effects: infusion-related, hypotension, bradycardia

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='af139f43-beb5-4eae-9a39-45e43b696dc5'></a>

aspen

LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='6f9d8702-de85-4167-b2b6-b17623e24085'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='67a7ccf1-9b0b-444b-bccf-9e6e48a42c8e'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='80e4fdeb-71a3-4b26-ac75-7b924179f39d'></a>

33

<a id='659e26a0-ed1a-43a3-948e-98e08c114204'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='96772f9d-f8d0-4a2c-a0eb-7799609c264a'></a>

# Hypercalcemia

* Acute > hypercalcemia of malignancy
* Chronic > primary hyperparathyroidism
* Treatment
  * Treat underlying cause
  * Hydration + loop diuretics
  * Calcitonin (rapid onset, tachyphylaxis)
  * Bisphosphonates (slower onset, longer duration)
  * Steroids
  * Surgery (primary hyperparathyroidism)

Kraft MD et al. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005; 62:1663-82.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='f5df1055-a011-4e16-9474-1bd0f3623445'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4708341b-7342-4e74-afa0-fc3a9098c99f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='af48509a-3c29-450d-bdb5-422113434b43'></a>

## Phosphorous

*   Primary intracellular anion
*   Major component of bone and teeth
*   Normal serum phosphorus 2.5-4.5 mg/dL
*   Essential part of nucleic acids, phospholipid membranes and nucleoproteins. Key role in macronutrient metabolism
*   Hormonal regulation
    *   Vitamin D
    *   Parathyroid hormone
    *   Calcitonin
*   Hyperphosphatemia rare, typically associated with renal dysfunction
    *   Treatment reduced intake, phosphate binders

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='fc071e19-1852-48de-bf18-f9f35be418d9'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='8d41722f-24b8-4e9d-8d41-8cbfbfe89b2e'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='28a35bd1-023d-4111-8256-9df8439049c6'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='46a10d2c-098d-43d1-b6e0-e0287aeb1b0f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='58eae71d-8a47-4072-b4d2-4a264c3ad521'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='ef73f772-9d54-4ba5-a626-4ec249a339f1'></a>

# Etiology of Hypophosphatemia

*   Poor intake
*   Poor absorption
    *   Phosphate binders, vitamin D deficiency, laxatives, diarrhea
*   Increased renal excretion
    *   Hyperparathyroidism, burns
    *   Diuretics, corticosteroids, foscarnet

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='45cfe06a-c1ef-45e9-8398-3648779389b8'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='e530e6e2-b17f-4797-a28b-50a15eaf6f8a'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='dd4c1520-df7d-4086-8df6-8ff32f43d44c'></a>

# Hypophosphatemia Management

*   Oral phosphate therapy
    *   Asymptomatic, able to take oral medications
    *   Neutraphos, KPhos neutral, sodium phosphate liquid
    *   Adverse effect – abdominal cramping, osmotic diarrhea
*   Parenteral phosphate therapy
    *   Symptomatic, malabsorptive conditions, unable to take oral medications

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral Enteral Nutrition

<a id='577ccb88-8244-4b14-86ba-0de002c45c6a'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='1d00fdb0-c011-440d-8ba9-7e0a8d118f52'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f894fc91-c2df-4245-97d3-65fbff67cb6f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='104568db-a54d-4524-9455-65e449c3fd93'></a>

42

<a id='be82f8b1-8d70-4ac1-9a24-453815a0a1b9'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='9c2cd745-32dc-475c-b8b9-3fd5dcf44f4f'></a>

# Parenteral Phosphate

*   Decrease dose by 50% in renal impairment
*   Empiric phosphate dose in PN: 0.3-0.5 mmol/kg/day
*   Check Na and K to determine appropriate phosphate salt
    *   1 mmol K3PO4 = 1.5 mEq K
    *   1 mmol NaPO4 = 1.33 mEq Na
*   Phosphorus replacement dosing
    *   Serum P 2.3-2.7 mg/dL: 0.08-0.16 mmol/kg
    *   Serum P 1.5-2.2 mg/dL: 0.16-0.32 mmol/kg
    *   Serum P < 1.5 mg/dL: 0.32-0.64 mmol/kg
*   Infusion rate \u2264 7 mmol phosphate per hour

\u00a9 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='435bcef6-7c68-4a36-a492-30890d2b7f9d'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='fff2617b-49e1-48ec-a448-cceca69e7902'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='aa342fdd-35b1-44ff-a078-2411e286605d'></a>

Calculating Na and K in Phosphate
Supplementation

Sodium Phosphate (NaPhos / NaPO₄)

1 mmol NaPO₄ = 1.33 mEq Na⁺

30 mmol NaPO₄ = 30 x 1.33 = ~40 mEq Na⁺

Consideration in sodium-sensitive disease
states / conditions
* Heart failure
* Ascites
* Renal failure
* Nephrotic syndrome
* Anasarca
* Elevated or near elevated serum sodium
levels

Potassium Phosphate (KPhos / K₃PO₄)

1 mmol K₃PO₄ = 1.5 mEq K⁺

30 mmol K₃PO₄ = 30 x 1.5 = ~45 mEq K⁺

Consideration in potassium-sensitive disease
states / conditions
* Acute kidney injury
* Chronic kidney disease
* Patients on potassium-retaining medications
* Elevated or near elevated serum potassium
levels

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='1878576c-e63d-4ac3-bd9c-5ec8893ddc64'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='7fc3b09b-394f-47ea-bcdf-27924460231b'></a>

ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='d42f7ce4-37b5-4ae0-b637-42066f45054d'></a>

72

<a id='dc677b88-c2a3-446a-8903-afe2df454016'></a>

13

<a id='d060e5fd-9144-4620-9d85-1c74a456e391'></a>

36

<a id='98f7c165-a6cd-440e-91fa-73a60f97874c'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='7bd4dc7a-c21b-48fb-88b1-ad4733aa335b'></a>

© 2025
ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
Refeeding Syndrome
<::flowchart
: This flowchart illustrates the pathophysiology of Refeeding Syndrome.
The central event is "Refeeding Syndrome" (in a red octagonal shape).

Pathways leading to Refeeding Syndrome:

1.  **Starvation / Malnutrition** leads to:
    a.  **Glycogenolysis, Gluconeogenesis, Protein catabolism** (accompanied by images of a liver and muscle).
        This leads to:
        i.  **Depletion of protein, fat, electrolytes, minerals and vitamins** and **Salt and water intolerance**.
        ii. This then leads to **Refeeding switch to anabolism, CHO primary energy source, Utilization of fluid, salt, nutrients**.
        iii. This stimulates **Insulin secretion** (accompanied by an image of a pancreas).
        iv. Insulin secretion leads to **Increase in Protein and glycogen synthesis, Intracellular K, Mg, Phos uptake, Thiamine utilization, Glucose uptake** (accompanied by an image of a cell).
        v.  This results in **Hypophosphatemia, Hypokalemia, Hypomagnesemia, Thiamine deficiency, Water and salt retention**.
        vi. These conditions contribute to the central **Refeeding Syndrome** node.
    b.  An arrow also points directly from **Starvation / Malnutrition** to the central **Refeeding Syndrome** node.

2.  An arrow points directly from **Hypophosphatemia, Hypokalemia, Hypomagnesemia, Thiamine deficiency, Water and salt retention** to the central **Refeeding Syndrome** node.

At the bottom right, there is the **aspen** logo with the text "LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition".
::>


<a id='4136f008-07f7-4b94-b27d-c7119285915f'></a>

73

<a id='78a65f05-dd9c-4b07-ba3c-66a7587267dd'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

ASPEN Consensus Recommendations for
Refeeding Syndrome

Table 3. ASPEN Consensus Criteria for Identifying Adult Patients at Risk for Refeeding Syndrome. 49,71,110

<table><thead><tr><th></th><th>Moderate Risk: 2 Risk Criteria Needed</th><th>Significant Risk: 1 Risk Criteria Needed</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>BMI</td><td>16-18.5 kg/m²</td><td><16 kg/m²</td></tr><tr><td>Weight loss</td><td>5% in 1 month</td><td>7.5% in 3 months or >10% in 6 months</td></tr><tr><td>Caloric intake</td><td>None or negligible oral intake for 5-6 days<br>OR<br><75% of estimated energy requirement for >7<br>days during an acute illness or injury<br>OR<br><75% of estimated energy requirement for >1<br>month</td><td>None or negligible oral intake for >7 days<br>OR<br><50% of estimated energy requirement for >5<br>days during an acute illness or injury<br>OR<br><50% of estimated energy requirement for >1<br>month</td></tr><tr><td>Abnormal prefeeding<br>potassium, phosphorus,<br>or magnesium serum<br>concentrations<sup>a</sup></td><td>Minimally low levels or normal current levels<br>and recent low levels necessitating minimal<br>or single-dose supplementation</td><td>Moderately/significantly low levels or<br>minimally low or normal levels and recent<br>low levels necessitating significant or<br>multiple-dose supplementation</td></tr><tr><td>Loss of subcutaneous fat</td><td>Evidence of moderate loss</td><td>Evidence of severe loss</td></tr><tr><td>Loss of muscle mass</td><td>Evidence of mild or moderate loss</td><td>Evidence of severe loss</td></tr><tr><td>Higher-risk comorbidities<br>(see Table 4)</td><td>Moderate disease</td><td>Severe disease</td></tr></tbody></table>

ASPEN, American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition; BMI, body mass index.
<sup>a</sup>Please note that electrolytes may be normal despite total-body deficiency, which is believed to increase risk of refeeding syndrome.

da Silva et al. Nutr Clin Pract. 2020;35:178-195.
aspen<br>LEADING THE SCIENCE AND<br>PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION<br>American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='1ce8ea12-d0cc-4aba-adca-ddf6c5e6de2d'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c34bf439-4a9a-4b07-ab28-9201207a5628'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='d32d5c7f-c8cc-4c5e-8259-5d134688548d'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e645f8ab-33d2-49fa-807f-eb9a2a15e916'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='e96965d1-1d6d-4d8f-a465-f29d86c8829c'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='fd707818-518a-4d53-aa9f-fecbcbbeadde'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

# ASPEN Consensus Recommendations for Refeeding Syndrome - Management

*   Check serum K, Mg, and Phos before initiation of nutrition
*   Correct severe deficiencies of P, K and Mg before providing nutrition
*   Start with 100-150 g of dextrose or 10-20 kcal/kg
    *   Include dextrose from other sources (IV fluids, IVPB, etc)
    *   Advance by 33% per day over 1-2 days
    *   If electrolytes difficult to correct or drop precipitously during initiation of nutrition, decrease dextrose provision by 50%
*   No recommendations for fluid, Na or protein restriction
*   Thiamine 100 mg/d for 5-7 days or longer
*   MVI daily

da Silva et al. Nutr Clin Pract. 2020;35:178-195

aspen LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='4dd081bc-b512-4c30-a1a4-d1b9f484709c'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='45914ac3-77a3-49d5-8963-f5cc7bd8bd54'></a>

75

<a id='391e018f-98c1-4f60-84aa-4d41b090d3ac'></a>

# Learning Assessment Answers

1. Answer= D
2. Answer= B
3. Answer= D
4. Answer= D
5. Answer= A
6. Answer= B

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c055b3da-d220-4dac-993a-b8fb74b72f47'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='00ef09d5-d507-4b0f-a19c-33a0ebcf92bc'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='f6d0b54c-f505-4e0a-ac26-e18d1c248ae8'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='ef4bec19-5fa1-40e7-8c71-48c062c629de'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='0ea3f946-5c92-44eb-bfe4-5ec67fc52cdf'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='7f310fc3-7c44-406c-951f-a34dcdbc3dcc'></a>

References

*   Braun MM, Barstow CH, Pyzocha NJ. Diagnosis and management of sodium disorders: hyponatremia and hypernatremia. Am Fam Physician. 2015;91:299-307.
*   Canada TW, Lord LM. Chapter 7 Fluid, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders. In: Mueller CM, ed. The A.S.P.E.N. Adult Nutrition Support Core Curriculum. 3rd ed. Maryland: A.S.P.E.N.; 2017:113-37.
*   Castillo JJ et al. Diagnosis and management of hyponatremia in cancer patients. The Oncologist 2012;17:756-765.
*   Clark CL, Sacks GS, Dickerson RN et al. Treatment of hypophosphatemia in patients receiving specialized nutrition support using a graduated dosing scheme: results from a prospective clinical trial. Crit Care Med. 1995;23:1504-10.
*   da Silva JSV, et al. ASPEN Consensus Recommendations for Refeeding Syndrome. Nutr Clin Pract. 2020;35:178-195..
*   Hammill-Ruth RJ, McGory R. Magnesium repletion and its effect on potassium homeostasis in critically ill adults: results of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Crit Care Med. 1996;24:38-45.

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='77446d72-343f-47ed-bff0-2c73b36a0386'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='6270d3d5-36fd-42d7-89f6-37d38b250561'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='378afa15-da88-4b04-966d-42865bb7c915'></a>

References

* Hess MW, et al. Systematic review: hypomagnesaemia induced by proton pump inhibition.
  *Ailment Pharmacol Ther* 2012;36:405-413.
* Holliday MA, Segar WE. The maintenance need for water in parenteral fluid therapy. *Pediatrics.*
  1957;19:923-32.
* Kraft MD, Btaiche IF, Sacks GS, Kudsk KA. Treatment of electrolytes disorders in adult patients
  in the intensive care unit. *Am J Health-Syst Pharm.* 2005; 62:1663-82.
* Mirtallo J, Canada T, Johnson D et al. Safe practices for parenteral nutrition. *JPEN J Parent*
  *Enteral Nutr.* 2004;28:S39-S70.
* Moritz ML and Ayus JC. Maintenance intravenous fluids in acutely ill patients. *N Eng J Med.*
  2015;373:1350-1360.
* Spasovski G, et al. Clinical practice guidelines on diagnosis and treatment of hyponatremia.
  *Nephrol Dial Transplant.* 2014;29 Suppl 2:i1-i39.
* Verbalis JG, Goldsmith, SR, Greenberg A et al. Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of
  hyponatremia: expert panel recommendations. *Am J Med.* 2013;126:S1-S42.

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='cd3768d1-8826-47b3-be06-ea90fd398920'></a>

<::aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
: figure::>

<a id='5bb15387-fe08-4f7f-be57-5bf3a2f4fb24'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='2db8e2cf-c630-4f11-88c9-ee84b393a7c0'></a>

46

<a id='931536db-9dc7-475d-9e2f-1c1fd4a4ac7b'></a>

39

<a id='ffb14a31-a730-4480-8fa7-b9507bbe8341'></a>

7/29/2025

<a id='1d387833-c481-4abb-ae43-7a6656e83048'></a>

Questions?

amtucker@mdanderson.org

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='a6ba817e-6e50-4b64-b042-be09aa2a2e13'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='693fb038-d0f5-4cba-827a-dba2d89ccf3e'></a>

79

<a id='0af0cea4-a1f4-486b-b19e-2e6580339688'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.
Questions
<::A panel of interactive buttons is displayed. The buttons are arranged in a grid:
- Top row: "Info Panel" (with an 'i' icon) and "Chat" (with a speech bubble icon).
- Middle row: "Polling" (with a bar chart icon) and "Resources" (with a document icon).
- Third row: "Questions" (with a question mark icon). This button is highlighted, indicating it is currently selected or active. An arrow points from the text "Submit Questions Here" to this "Questions" button.
- Bottom row: "Request Support" (with a person icon).
: interactive panel::>
<::A logo for "aspen" is displayed. Below the stylized "aspen" text, it reads "LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION" and "American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition."
: logo::>

<a id='8e544191-38a7-4051-943b-f15c7593ced3'></a>

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='7fc65063-37cd-49c9-ae7f-62a3e865f45f'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='d5c5c47b-cec9-4b45-b086-5b103c13ffcc'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='04d0878b-f367-43aa-843b-b753c9e98d45'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='cad8b61f-f6cb-417b-8305-b2a8a45f01d6'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='819edb40-4714-4bf3-b065-8f01470ad181'></a>

# Claim CE Credit

## Fluids and Electrolytes

**Deadline to claim CE credit: August 30, 2025**

*   You must complete and submit the evaluation form for an individual session to claim CE credit for that session. You can complete the form at the end of each session.
*   You must complete the Overall Conference Evaluation to receive your course certificate. You can complete this form at the end of the course.
*   Detailed Instructions for claiming CE credit are listed in the course handout.

**Pharmacy Participants**
PharmD and RPh participants should claim CE immediately after each session to ensure submission to ACPE within required 60-day timeframe. See handout packet for more information.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='42e68580-741a-4873-855e-cd5af98ac3a5'></a>

1UIon.

aspen
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND
PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

<a id='c3dd8da6-eae5-4824-ace7-9bb18b2c6b74'></a>

© 2025 ASPEN | American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. All Rights Reserved.

<a id='a041c7c7-6cf7-4672-a66e-f385fa370116'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='6bebf748-716d-487b-bc73-2001bed296cc'></a>

<::aspen
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
PARENTERAL AND ENTERAL NUTRITION
: figure::>

<a id='0411f828-179b-4c4f-ae6e-f6a4cee4ecda'></a>

LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITION

Visit:
nutritioncare.org for more information
on clinical nutrition and metabolism

nutritioncare.org/membership to
become a member

nutritioncare.org/elearning for
on-demand continuing education

Follow or like us on:
nutritioncare.org/facebook
nutritioncare.org/X
nutritioncare.org/linkedin
nutritioncare.org/youtube
nutritioncare.org/podcasts

82

<a id='800ad401-dfbe-4662-a5df-e43aab807ebb'></a>

48

<a id='b4bce6aa-c851-4004-b06a-8c0fe628fea3'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='d93b569a-5912-469a-97c8-1fafe8b2aa3e'></a>

Fluids and Electrolytes 2025

<a id='9bf6773f-c3fa-475a-82a2-8d6959439b57'></a>

Anne M. Tucker, PharmD, BCNSP
Clinical Pharmacy Specialist – Critical Care / Nutrition Support
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

<a id='52848762-184e-455c-b59d-44c82f676a3a'></a>

Disclosures
Consultant for Up To Date, Inc.

<a id='3f9bd4a7-97a3-45dd-8c05-a40214b6f8eb'></a>

**Presentation Overview/Summary**
Parenteral Nutrition (PN) management demands not only assessment and monitoring calorie and protein needs but also careful management of the patient's fluid and electrolytes. Water, sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus and magnesium are essential components on PN administration. Nutrition support clinicians must be aware of normal requirements and how to prevent and treat disorders related to fluids and electrolytes. Refeeding syndrome is a severe manifestation of altered electrolyte and mineral requirements that can occur with feeding severely malnourished patients and understanding of its pathophysiology will help to prevent adverse outcomes.

<a id='c20c468f-579e-486b-a23f-f40aa2cb1a28'></a>

**Learning Objectives**
At the conclusion of the presentation, the learner will be able to:
1. Assess fluid and electrolyte needs of a patient
2. Develop a therapeutic plan for fluid and electrolyte requirements
3. Prevent and manage complications of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities

<a id='864c8a02-0656-4a00-9a50-2f24e7f40262'></a>

Key Takeaways/Fast Facts
* Body fluid composition correlates with muscle mass
* Hyponatremia is most commonly associated with an excess of intravascular fluid
* Hypo and hyperkalemia can affect the electrocardiogram
* Refeeding syndrome can lead to severe electrolyte disorders in patients at moderate to high risk.

<a id='68df6ce0-024a-4cba-8d70-8e963802f19b'></a>

## Learning Assessment Questions

1. Which of the following sodium concentrations (mEq/L) is the most appropriate choice to use when formulating a parenteral nutrition plan for a patient with high output ileostomy output?

a. 38.5 mEq sodium per Liter
b. 77 mEq sodium per Liter
c. 115 mEq sodium per Liter
d. 154 mEq sodium per Liter

<a id='da168e38-6309-4759-b1e6-687e62087f92'></a>

CAPTION ERROR

<a id='c3a28911-bbcb-45b0-928d-d742b7f09eac'></a>

2. A patient presents with hypotonic hyponatremia and is currently on sertraline. What subtype of hyponatremia would you suspect?
   a. Hypovolemic
   b. Euvolemic
   c. Hypervolemic
   d. None of the above

3. Which of the following sodium concentrations (mEq/L) is the most appropriate choice to use when formulating a parenteral nutrition plan for a patient with SIADH?
   a. 38.5 mEq sodium per Liter
   b. 77 mEq sodium per Liter
   c. 115 mEq sodium per Liter
   d. 154 mEq sodium per Liter

4. Which of the follow is/are important considerations when ordering parenteral potassium supplementation?
   a. Location of patient
   b. Type of intravenous access
   c. Renal function
   d. All the above

5. Which of the following is used in the treatment of hyperkalemia with the mechanism of increased potassium elimination?
   a. Furosemide
   b. Calcium gluconate
   c. Albuterol
   d. Insulin

6. A patient is noted to have a serum magnesium of 1.5 mg/dL. Serum creatinine is 2.2 mg/dL. What is an appropriate recommendation for magnesium sulfate IV?
   a. Magnesium supplementation is not indicated
   b. 16 mEq magnesium sulfate
   c. 24 mEq magnesium sulfate
   d. 48 mEq magnesium sulfate

<a id='2e9fedf0-8b41-41d1-b2f0-e03f161404a9'></a>

## Learning Assessment Answers:

1.  Answer= D; Since ileostomy output is isotonic, the parenteral nutrition plan should be formulated to replace these losses which would be approximately normal saline concentration (~154 mEq sodium per Liter).
2.  Answer= B; Sertraline is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) which is a known drug class associated with SIADH, a type of euvolemic hypotonic hyponatremia.
3.  Answer= D; In SIADH, there are significant sodium losses in the urine and an inappropriate secretion of ADH relative to fluid status (euvolemia). It is recommended to formulate the parenteral nutrition as a concentrated formula (fluid restrict) and use approximately normal saline concentration (~154 mEq sodium per Liter).

<a id='fd4ae817-4a05-4683-8528-b3145f8f4f6d'></a>

50